---
source: "BLUE FLASH   2APR2021.docx"
tags:  []
---

**BLUE FLASH   ****2****APR2021**

**U****nited States v. Drakeford****   4thCIR   26MAR2021**
Law enforcement officers received a tip from a confidential informant about two interactions that officers believed were consistent with the manner in which illegal drugs are bought and sold, but in which no drugs were found. Acting on the tip, another officer witnessed a handshake between defendant and another man and concluded that it was a hand-to-hand drug transaction, even though the officer did not see anything exchanged. The officers concluded that this was reasonable suspicion of illegal drug dealing even though the interaction took place in a public space, in broad daylight, outside of the vehicles, and in front of a security camera. After the interaction, defendant went into a store, rather than immediately leaving the scene. The defendant filed a motion to suppress and the district court denied the motion. The Fourth Circuit reversed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress, concluding that officers did not have reasonable suspicion to stop and frisk him. The court agreed with the defendant that the officers did not have more than a mere hunch that criminal activity was afoot when they stopped him.
LEA ONE TAGS 1-5, 6-4

**U****nited States v. Reed****   6thCIR   1APR2021**
Memphis Officers suspected Reed of distributing marijuana. Reed had prior drug convictions. Detective Evans filed affidavits seeking search warrants for OK Tire, Orchi Road, and Bond Road. At OK Tire, owned by Reed's girlfriend, a reliable confidential informant had made a controlled buy from Reed and had seen Reed “selling and storing marijuana.” Evans had surveilled the couple leaving their home (Bond Road) and traveling to OK. Each had keys to the business. Reed’s mother lived on Orchi Road. Reed’s driver’s license listed it; Evans had watched the informant make a controlled buy from Reed there. Evans sought a warrant to search Bond Road for financial records and drug proceeds (not for drugs). A state judge issued three search warrants. Officers seized nothing from OK and only baggies and a digital scale from Orchi Road. The search at Bond Road uncovered guns, ammunition, 18.7 grams of marijuana, 2.1 grams of THC wax, and $5,636 in cash. Reed confessed that the guns and drugs were his and that he had been selling marijuana. He later successfully moved to suppress the evidence obtained from at Bond Road, including his statements. The Sixth Circuit reversed, holding that even when a search violates the Fourth Amendment, courts should not suppress evidence if the police reasonably relied on a judge’s decision that probable cause justified a warrant.
LEA ONE TAGS 1-7-6

**C****ibulka**** v. City of Madison****   7thCIR   29MAR2021**
Todd and Shelly Cibulka drove to the University of Wisconsin–Madison, where their daughter Emily was a freshman. They went to a bar and imbibed for several hours. Upon leaving, they were clearly intoxicated. Emily, wanting to get them home, called the police non-emergency number. Conducting a welfare check, Officer Johnson said he could give them a ride but the Cibulkas would not identify the location of their truck. Todd staggered toward Johnson Street. Officer Erwin thought Todd might tumble into the busy street, grabbed Todd, and told Todd to sit down. Todd would not comply. It appeared that Todd might strike the much-smaller officer. The officers took Todd to the ground to reduce the risk of harm, told him to stop resisting, and handcuffed him. Todd declined medical attention. The officers walked Todd to the squad car. Todd resisted and was placed under arrest for disorderly conduct and resisting an officer. He was lifted into a police van and taken to jail. He was released at 2:30 the next morning, returned to his truck, and smashed through the gate instead of paying the exit fare. The Cibulkas filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983. The Seventh Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of the defendants. The officers are entitled to qualified immunity. It was reasonable for the officers to believe there was probable cause to arrest Todd for disorderly conduct and for resisting an officer; the officers stopped well short of such unnecessary roughness.
LEA ONE TAGS

**U****nited States v. Cox****   8thCIR   30MAR2021**
The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress after he entered a conditional plea of guilty to possession with intent to distribute more than 5 kilograms of cocaine. The court concluded that the trooper's determination that the vehicle was following too closely in violation of the relevant statute was objectively reasonable. In the alternative, the district court did not clearly err in finding that nothing prevented the driver from slowing down sooner and maintaining a reasonable and prudent distance behind the pickup. The court also concluded that the stop was not improperly prolonged once the trooper indicated he did not intend to issue a ticket, because the trooper was clearly conducting routine traffic violation-related tasks. In this case, the trooper asked the two men questions related to their destination, route, and purpose and questions were posed while awaiting dispatch's response to his criminal histories check. Furthermore, the driver of the car consented to a search of the rental vehicle, and defendant, a passenger, posed no objection when informed of the impending search and stood by quietly as it took place.
LEA ONE TAGS

**I****daho v. ****Clark****  ****IDSupCt****   30MAR2021**
While responding to a call regarding an ongoing robbery at a mobile home park in Grangeville, Idaho, officers with the Grangeville Police Department interacted with defendant-appellant William Clark. Upon learning that Clark had an outstanding warrant for his arrest in Nez Perce County, Idaho, the officers attempted to arrest him. Clark fled, first entering a nearby home where the owner of the home implored him to leave. After exiting the first home, Clark entered the home next door, successfully evading the officers for approximately ten minutes. The officers eventually located Clark, hiding underneath a bed in the second home, where he was arrested. After a bench trial, the district court found Clark guilty on both counts of felony unlawful entry, concluding that the officers’ pursuit to execute the arrest warrant constituted “fresh pursuit” as defined in Idaho Code section 19-705. Clark appealed, arguing that pursuit to execute an outstanding warrant did not fall under either the common law or statutory definition of “fresh pursuit.” As a result, Clark argued the State failed to present sufficient evidence of the pursuit element for felony unlawful entry. Finding that "fresh pursuit," as defined in section 19-705 included pursuit to execute an arrest warrant, the Idaho Supreme Court affirmed Clark's conviction.
LEA ONE TAGS (State Law Fresh Pursuit)

**S****chwartz v. State****   ****WYSupCt****   31MAR2021**
The Supreme Court affirmed Defendant's conviction of second-degree murder and aggravated assault, holding that the district court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress statements he made at the scene of the crime and during a recorded interview. On appeal, Defendant argued that the admission of the challenged statements violated his rights under the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment because he was not informed of his Miranda rights before he was questioned and because he was under the influence of methamphetamine at the time of the recorded interview. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the district court (1) did not err when it found Defendant's statements at the scene fell under the public safety exception to Miranda; and (2) did not err when it found that Defendant voluntarily waived his Miranda rights at the police station.
LEA ONE TAGS  7-3-1, 7-2-4

**USE OF FORCE**
**K****etcham v. City of Mount Vernon****   2ndCIR   29MAR2021**
The Second Circuit vacated the district court's grant of summary judgment to defendants in an action brought by plaintiff, alleging excessive force under 42 U.S.C. 1983, as well as state law assault and battery claims. The court found that the district court improperly resolved factual disputes in favor of defendants at the summary judgment stage. In this case, the district court's recitation of the facts elided crucial distinctions between the testimony of the three parties to the encounter. The court explained that, while the officers testified to using a reasonable amount of force to restrain an uncooperative individual matching the description of a suspect, plaintiff testified to an aggressive assault, pleas for help, and a spiteful effort to punish a confused citizen by deliberately slamming his head into the patrol car's exterior as punishment for his confusion. Therefore, the court concluded that it is for a jury and not a judge to decide which of these versions of events is accurate, and qualified immunity would not protect the deliberate infliction of injury suggested by plaintiff's testimony. However, the court did not find that reassignment to another judge was necessary absent any reason to find that the district court would not accept the court's remand and any grounds to reassign the case. The court remanded for further proceedings.
LEA ONE TAGS

**R****oque v. ****Harvel****   5thCIR   1APR2021**
After a police officer shot and killed Jason Roque, a suicidal man experiencing a mental-health crisis, Roque's parents filed suit against the officer, alleging excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of summary judgment, concluding that there are factual disputes regarding whether the officer's second and third shots were excessive and objectively unreasonable. In this case, the factual disputes relate to whether a reasonable officer would have known that Jason was incapacitated after the first shot. The court also concluded that precedent shows that by 2017, it was clearly established—and possibly even obvious—that an officer violates the Fourth Amendment if he shoots an unarmed, incapacitated suspect who is moving away from everyone present at the scene. Therefore, if the factual disputes are resolved in plaintiffs' favor, the officer is not entitled to qualified immunity.
LEA ONE TAGS

**J****acobsen v. Klinefelter****   8thCIR   30MAR2021**
Plaintiff filed suit against a deputy sheriff, alleging an unreasonable seizure under the Fourth Amendment and state-law torts of battery and negligent infliction of emotional distress. Plaintiff's action arose from an incident where he was asked to leave an automobile auction because the deputy sheriff believed that he was trespassing in a restricted area. When the deputy grabbed plaintiff's arm to escort him out of the building, plaintiff shoved the deputy. The deputy eventually deployed pepper spray against a defiant plaintiff. Plaintiff then seized the pepper spray cannister from the deputy and a further altercation ensued. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment for the deputy based on qualified immunity, concluding that, even if the deputy was mistaken about trespassing, plaintiff's physical resistance gave the deputy probable cause to believe that plaintiff committed another offense by unlawfully resisting arrest or detention. The court explained that plaintiff's use of force gave the deputy reasonable grounds to believe that additional force was justified to remove plaintiff from the premises. The court also concluded that, under these circumstances, a reasonable officer could have believed that it was reasonable to strike the resisting plaintiff in the head and take him to the ground for handcuffing. Furthermore, plaintiff cites no authority in comparable circumstances that clearly establishes a right to be free from the deputy's use of force. Therefore, the deputy is entitled to qualified immunity on plaintiff's Fourth Amendment claim. Finally, the court concluded that the district court properly applied official immunity to dismiss the state-law claims.
LEA ONE TAGS

**F****rasier v. Evans****   10thCIR   29MAR2021**
After Plaintiff-Appellee Levi Frasier video-recorded Denver police officers using force while arresting an uncooperative suspect in public, one of the officers followed Frasier to his car and asked him to provide a statement on what he had seen and to turn over his video of the arrest. Frasier at first denied having filmed the arrest but ultimately showed the officer the tablet computer on which he had video-recorded it. He did so after an officer, Defendant-Appellant Christopher Evans, and four other members of the Denver Police Department (the other Defendants-Appellants) surrounded him and allegedly pressured him to comply with their demand to turn over the video. Frasier contended that when he showed Officer Evans the tablet computer, the officer grabbed it from his hands and searched it for the video without his consent. Frasier sued the five officers under 42 U.S.C. 1983, claiming they violated and conspired to violate his constitutional rights under both the First and Fourth Amendments. The officers moved the district court for summary judgment on qualified-immunity grounds, and the court granted them qualified immunity on some of Frasier’s claims but denied it to them on others. The district court, as relevant here, held that Officer Evans had reasonable suspicion to detain Frasier throughout their encounter because Frasier lied to him about filming the arrest, thereby potentially violating Colorado Revised Statutes 18-8-111. The court granted Officer Evans qualified immunity on Frasier’s claim that the officer illegally detained him in violation of the Fourth Amendment, and Frasier did not oppose granting summary judgment to the other officers on this claim. Officer Evans did not move for summary judgment on Frasier’s claim that he illegally searched Frasier’s tablet computer in violation of the Fourth Amendment, but the other officers did. The court granted them summary judgment because the record did not support a finding that they personally participated in the alleged search. The district court, however, denied the officers qualified immunity on Frasier’s First Amendment retaliation claim even though it had concluded that Frasier did not have a clearly established right to film a public arrest. The officers appealed the district court’s partial denial of qualified immunity. The Tenth Circuit concluded the district court erred and reversed the partial denial of the officers' motions for summary judgment on qualified immunity grounds. The matter was remanded for further proceedings.
LEA ONE TAGS

LEA ONE TAGS
