---
source: "48 BF 26NOV2021.docx"
tags:
  - Flight
  - Reasonable-suspicion
  - Independent-Source-Doctrine
  - Discovery
  - Qualified-Immunity
  - Bivens
  - Officer-Liability
  - Use-of-Force
  - Qualified-Immunity
---

48 BF 26NOV2021

State v. Haughwout
Court: Connecticut Supreme Court
Opinion Date: November 30, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Flight, Reasonable suspicion

Summary: Flight did not create RS where defendant was parked in library parking lot to get free wifi.

The Supreme Court affirmed in part and reversed in part Defendant's convictions on charges arising from two separate incidents between him and officers of the Clinton Police Department in July 2015, holding that Defendant's conviction in the case relating to events of July 19, 2015 must be reversed and the conviction in the case relating to the events of July 22, 2015 is reversed with respect to one assault count. On appeal, Defendant argued (1) evidence of certain events during the first incident should have been suppressed because those events were the result of an unconstitutional investigatory detention, and (2) his convictions of two counts of assault of public safety personnel related to the second incident was infirm because the evidence was insufficient and the trial court erred in instructing the jury. The Supreme Court reversed in part, holding (1) the trial court erred in denying Defendant's motion to suppress; and (2) a new trial was required with respect to one of the assault charges due to instructional error.

State v. Griffin
Court: Connecticut Supreme Court
Opinion Date: November 23, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Independent Source Doctrine

Summary: Rifle found during warrantless sweep when warrant was already being obtained and ultimately issued.

The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the trial court convicting Defendant of murder, criminal attempt to commit robbery in the first degree, conspiracy to commit robbery in the first degree, and criminal possession of a firearm, holding that the trial court did not err in denying Defendant's motions to suppress. In his suppression motions, Defendant sought to suppress (1) the firearm and related evidence seized from his residence, which evidence he argued was discovered as a result of an unlawful search, and (2) the incriminating statements he made during an interrogation at the police station, claiming the statements were made involuntarily. The Supreme Court affirmed the denial of Defendant's motions to suppress, holding (1) the trial court properly Defendant's motion to suppress the evidence obtained during the search of his residence; and (2) Defendant's statements were voluntary, and the trial court properly admitted them into evidence at trial.

Dennis v. City of Philadelphia
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
Opinion Date: November 23, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Discovery, Qualified Immunity

Summary: Detective denied qualified immunity in 1983 suit for failure to produce impeachment evidence (Giglio).

Dennis was convicted of a 1991 robbery and first-degree murder and was sentenced to death. In 2013, the district court granted Dennis’s habeas petition, vacated his conviction, and ordered a new trial on all charges, finding that Dennis’s prosecutors withheld material impeachment evidence. The Third Circuit, en banc, affirmed. On remand, Dennis accepted a deal. In exchange for a time-served sentence, he pleaded nolo contendere to reduced charges. Dennis then filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging fabrication of evidence and deliberate deception, civil rights conspiracy, failure to intervene, supervisory liability, and municipal liability. The Third Circuit affirmed the denial of a motion to dismiss based on qualified immunity. Dennis has alleged the violation of his due process rights clearly established at the time of the detective’s conduct on which the claims are based. Dennis’s deliberate deception claim not only alleges that the detectives withheld exculpatory and impeachment evidence that would have supported his alibi and defense, but that they also failed to correct testimony they knew was false and concealed from the defense the evidence that revealed that trial testimony as false. The court dismissed, for lack of jurisdiction on interlocutory appeal, consideration of a ruling that the Heck bar does not apply.

Elhady v. Unidentified CBP Agents
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 19, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Bivens, Officer Liability

Summary: Court refused to extend Bivens to allow for liability for CBP officers under national security special factor.

Elhady, a U.S. citizen returning from Canada, was detained for questioning by border-patrol agents. They took Elhady’s jacket and shoes, leaving him only his shirt, pants, undergarments, and socks. According to Elhady, the cell “got colder and colder,” and he began shivering uncontrollably. He says he yelled to the officers but they told him, “you’ll be out soon.” After about four hours, the officers told him he could leave. He stated he felt too ill to drive. The officers called an ambulance. The EMT noted that Elhady received the highest score on a test that measured his level of consciousness; he had delayed capillary refill, consistent with exposure to the cold. When he reached the hospital, his temperature was 96.08 degrees, barely below the normal range. The physician let him rest. When Elhady woke up, the doctor told him he was “good to go.” Elhady sued several border-patrol officers, seeking monetary damages under “Bivens.” The district court found that extending Bivens to provide an implied cause of action here was appropriate and found enough evidence to show that one officer, Bradley, had violated Elhady’s right to be “free from exposure to severe weather and temperatures,” which was clearly established so that qualified immunity did not protect Bradley. The Sixth Circuit reversed. The district court erred in engaging in the “disfavored judicial activity” of recognizing a new Bivens action. National security is a special factor counseling against extending Bivens to the border context.

Johnson v. City of Miami Beach
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
Opinion Date: November 19, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, Qualified Immunity

Summary: Video and testimony used to deny officer qualified immunity for entering cell and striking secured plaintiff in the face.

The Eleventh Circuit reversed the district court's grant of summary judgment in favor of a police officer individually and the City of Miami Beach on plaintiff's claims of excessive force and state law battery. Plaintiff alleged that his arrest was effected and he was fully secured, not resisting, and not posing a threat when the officer gratuitously and forcibly struck him in his face. The court reviewed the evidence and videos in the light most favorable to plaintiff, and with the benefit of oral argument, concluding that the district court erred in granting summary judgment in favor of defendants. In this case, a reasonable jury could find that the officer used excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment when he entered the holding cell and forcibly struck plaintiff, who was then secure, not resisting, and not a safety threat to any officers. Furthermore, an objectively reasonable officer would have known at the time that it was clearly unlawful to gratuitously and forcibly strike an arrestee who was fully secured, not resisting, not posing a safety threat, and not attempting to flee. Likewise, summary judgment is not warranted on plaintiff's state law battery claims. The court remanded for further proceedings.
