---
source: "BF29  19JUL2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

B.F. 29     19JUL2024

**SEARCH AND SEIZURE ****EVIDENCE SUPPRESSION ****CASES**

***EIGHTH CIRCUIT***

**United States v. Sanford**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 16, 2024
Docket: 23-2186

*LEO LAW Topic **3-3**:**  The occupants of a vehicle partially blocked by a patrol car with amber lights flashing were not seized under the Fourth Amendment.*

On September 5, 2021, the owner of a nightclub in Waterloo, Iowa, texted Waterloo Police Department (WPD) Officer Amira Ehlers to say that two men were "smoking and drinking" in a car in front of the club. Officer Ehlers texted back, asking for a description of the vehicle, but she did not receive a response before she began driving to the club. When Ehlers arrived, she parked in the traffic lane of the street, in front of the main entrance, as she usually did when responding to calls from this location. Ehlers put on her amber warning lights and got out of her squad car to speak with the club's owner, who pointed to a blue Kia sedan parked at the curb in front of the club. By this point, WPD Sergeant Spencer Gann had also arrived. He parked in the street directly behind Ehlers' squad car and asked her which vehicle was the subject of the call. Ehlers told him it was the Kia. As Ehlers approached the Kia, the driver's side window was down, and she saw two men—Sanford and Simmons—one in the driver's seat and one in the passenger seat. She also smelled marijuana coming from the Kia. The officers ordered Sanford and Simmons out of the car, searched it, and found marijuana, a large amount of cash, and a handgun. Both men were charged with possessing a firearm after being convicted of a felony.

At trial in the United States District Court for the Northern District of Iowa, both Sanford and Simmons filed motions to suppress the evidence, arguing they were unlawfully seized when the officers blocked their car. The district court held an evidentiary hearing and found that the car was not completely blocked and could have moved. The court denied the motions to suppress, concluding that the men were not seized until the officers smelled marijuana and ordered them out of the vehicle. 

The Eighth Circuit agreed that a reasonable person in the defendants' position would have felt free to leave, despite the presence of armed officers and flashing amber caution lights. The court held that the positioning of the squad cars did not constitute a seizure under the Fourth Amendment and affirmed the denial of the motions to suppress.

**STATE APPELLATE DECISIONS**

**State of Maine v. Farley**
Maine Supreme Judicial Court
July 18, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **7-3**: **The suspect was not in custody for Miranda purposes when **he was interviewed in his home in a** conversational manner** and informed he could stop the interview and leave at any time**.**     *

In this case, Farley was questioned at his residence about allegations of gross sexual assault and unlawful sexual contact involving an eleven-year-old victim who frequently visited Farley's home. Farley admitted to engaging in sexual acts with the victim during a police interview at his home. Shortly thereafter, he was charged with sexual offenses.

At trial, Falrey filed motions to suppress his statements made during the police interview, arguing he was not provided a Miranda rights advisement and his statements were involuntary. The trial court denied the motion, determining that Farley was not in custody and that his statements were voluntary. The court found that the interview was non-custodial, conducted in a conversational manner and that the defendant was informed he could leave at any time. The court also found no evidence that the defendant's hearing issues rendered his statements involuntary.

On appeal, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court affirmed the trial court's judgment. The court held that the trial court did not err in denying the motions to suppress, as the defendant was not in arrest-like custody, and therefore, a Miranda warning was not required. The court further held Farley's statements were voluntary. 

**USE OF FORCE**** ****AND OFFICER LIABILITY ****CASES**

**Rambert v. City of Greenville**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
July 12, 2024
Docket: 22-1428

*LEO LAW Topic **8-3**:   **The** use of deadly force **was reasonable** when he fired at a suspect of a **potentially **violent crime who, despite repeated commands, charged the officer at full speed and advanced to close proximity to the officer.** *

On July 9, 2019, at around 4:00 a.m., an elderly couple reported a breaking-and-entering in progress at their Greenville, North Carolina residence. They reported hearing glass break and a male voice yelling in the background. The police department dispatched two officers to the scene. Johnson was working the night shift and was in the area while on a break. Although Johnson was not dispatched, he heard the call on his radio. To assist, he then drove to the scene and arrived first. Johnson knew that the two dispatched officers were five to seven minutes away. From the dispatch, he knew that a breaking-and-entering was in progress, with a report of glass breaking and a yell from a male voice.
Upon arrival, Johnson heard loud yelling and saw Sean Rambert running towards him while yelling. Johnson commanded Rambert to get on the ground eight times, but Rambert did not comply and continued to charge Johnson. Johnson fired multiple shots at Rambert, who continued to advance even after being shot. Rambert eventually fell and later died from his injuries.

After Officer David Johnson used deadly force against Sean Rambert, Rambert's estate sued Johnson and the City of Greenville, North Carolina, which operated the police department where Johnson worked. Under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, the estate alleged that Johnson's excessive force and the city's policies and pattern of failing to train and supervise violated Rambert's Fourth Amendment rights. The district court denied Johnson's motion for summary judgment based on qualified immunity. The court found genuine disputes of material fact regarding the reasonableness of Johnson's conduct. It concluded that a jury could determine that Johnson violated Rambert's Fourth Amendment rights by using excessive force. The court also denied summary judgment on the remaining federal and state law claims against Johnson and the City of Greenville.

On appeal, the Fourth Circuit held that considering the undisputed facts, Johnson was entitled to qualified immunity on the Fourth Amendment claim. The court held that an officer is entitled to qualified immunity from a claim that his use of deadly force violated the Fourth Amendment when he fired at a suspect of a potentially violent crime who, despite repeated commands, charged the officer at full speed and advanced to close proximity to the officer. Such conduct was not objectively unreasonable and, even if it was, did not violate clearly established law.

**Davis v. Rook**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
July 12, 2024
Docket: 23-1655

*LEO LAW Topic **9-4**:  **Summary judgment granted for detention officers who could not have perceived the risk of harm and acted reasonably in waiting for backup before intervening in an assault on a pretrial detainee.**    *

Lorenzo Davis, a pretrial detainee at a county detention facility, suffered serious eye injuries after being attacked by fellow detainees Massey and Hibbler. Davis had reported threats and requested a transfer, but the identity of the officer he spoke to is unknown. On the morning of the attack, Officer Gibson placed cleaning supplies in the common area and left to supervise the recreation room. Massey and Hibbler used the cleaning supplies to beat Davis. Officer Gibson learned of the fight from a hall worker and passed the keys to Officer Rook, who called for assistance and waited for backup before intervening.

Davis sued Officers Gibson and Rook under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging they violated the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment by failing to protect him. The district court granted summary judgment for the officers, finding that the evidence did not support the claim that a reasonable officer would have appreciated the risk to Davis. The court also found that Officer Rook acted reasonably by waiting for backup before intervening. The court did not address the defendants' qualified immunity defense.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reviewed the district court's grant of summary judgment de novo. The court affirmed the lower court's decision, holding that a reasonable officer in Officer Gibson's position would not have perceived the risk of harm to Davis, as there was no evidence that Gibson knew about the threats or Davis's request for a transfer. Additionally, the court found that Officer Rook acted reasonably by waiting for backup before intervening in the fight, as it was a standard and safe procedure. 

**Irish v. McNamara**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 18, 2024
Docket: 23-3034

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **8-4, 9-4**: **It is not clearly established **that an officer c**an** seize a fellow officer with a K9 without subjectively intending to do so**. Therefore, the K9 officer is entitled to qualified immunity.  **     *

Officer Daniel Irish was bitten by a police K9 named Thor while pursuing a suspect. Thor's handler was Deputy Keith McNamara. The incident occurred during a high-speed chase of a suspect ending in a cemetery, where McNamara deployed K9 Thor without a leash. Irish was unaware of Thor's presence and was bitten by Thor. Irish sued McNamara under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 in the United States District Court for the District of Minnesota, claiming a violation of his Fourth Amendment rights to be free from excessive force and an unreasonable seizure. The district court denied McNamara's motion to dismiss based on qualified immunity. The court reasoned that it was clearly established that a seizure occurred under the Fourth Amendment, despite acknowledging the incident was an unfortunate accident. 

The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reviewed the case. The court focused on whether it was clearly established that the K9's bite constituted a seizure under the Fourth Amendment. The court noted that for a seizure to occur, an officer must intentionally apply physical force or show authority to restrain an individual's freedom of movement. The court concluded that McNamara did not subjectively intend to seize Irish, as evidenced by his commands to Thor to disengage and his immediate actions to restrain the K9. The court held that the law was not clearly established as of March 2022 that an officer in Minnesota could seize a fellow officer with a K9 without subjectively intending to do so. Therefore, the court held that McNamara was entitled to qualified immunity, reversed the district court's decision, and remanded with instructions to dismiss Officer Irish's complaint.

**Marks v. Bauer**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 12, 2024
Docket: 23-1420

*LEO LAW Topic**s**  **8-1, 8-3, 8-4, 9-4**: **Officer denied qualified immunity for the use of high-velocity non-lethal weapon from a range that could make such use deadly when aimed at the head of a protestor.**       *

During George Floyd protests in Minneapolis, Ethan Marks sustained severe injuries, including a ruptured eyeball and traumatic brain injury, when Minneapolis Police Officer Benjamin Bauer shot him with a chemical-filled projectile from a close range. Marks sued Bauer under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment.

The district court found that Bauer's use of force was not objectively reasonable under the circumstances and that there was a genuine dispute of material fact regarding whether Bauer intended to use deadly force. The court also noted that existing precedent put Bauer on notice that deadly force is appropriate only in response to a significant threat of death or serious physical injury, which was not present in this case. In addition, the district court found that even if the force used by Officer Bauer was considered non-deadly, the force used on Marks was unreasonable, given the facts and circumstances confronting Officer Bauer. 

On appeal, the Eighth Circuit held that Marks was seized when Bauer shot him with a projectile and that the force used was not objectively reasonable. The court found that a reasonable jury could conclude that Marks did not pose an immediate threat at the time he was shot. The court also held that it was clearly established that using deadly force on a non-threatening suspect was unlawful. Consequently, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision, denying Bauer qualified immunity.

**Johnson v. City of Atlanta**
US Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
July 12, 2024
Docket: 22-11359

*LEO LAW Topics 8-1, 9-4: Based on a review of video evidence, the officer's use of force while arresting an intoxicated driver was objectively reasonable.** *

Officer Garrett Rolfe arrested Charles Johnson, Jr. for driving while intoxicated. Johnson alleged that Rolfe used excessive force during the arrest, resulting in a broken collarbone. Johnson sued Rolfe and the City of Atlanta under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Georgia state law, claiming excessive force and battery. Johnson's complaint stated that he was respectful and did not resist arrest, but Rolfe threw him to the ground, causing his injury.

In district court, the city moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing it failed to state a claim for Monell liability. Officer Rolfe moved for judgment on the pleadings, submitting body camera and dashcam footage showing Johnson resisting arrest. The district court considered the video evidence, determining it was central to Johnson's claims. Based on the video review, the court found that Rolfe did not use excessive force and was entitled to qualified immunity on the federal claims and official immunity on the state law claims. The court dismissed the Monell claim against the city, holding there was no underlying constitutional violation.

The Eleventh Circuit held that the video evidence was properly considered under the incorporation-by-reference doctrine and that Rolfe's use of force was objectively reasonable given the circumstances, including Johnson's resistance and the dangerous location of the arrest. Therefore, Rolfe was entitled to qualified immunity on the federal claims and official immunity on the state law claims. The court also affirmed the dismissal of the Monell claim against the city, as no constitutional violation occurred.

**DO NOT PUBLISH**

Wolk v. Hutchinson
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 12, 2024
Docket: 23-2944

LEO LAW Topic :      

Following the fatal police shooting of Daunte Wright, protests erupted in Brooklyn Center, Minnesota. Sam Wolk, a protester, filed a lawsuit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging First and Fourth Amendment violations and civil conspiracy against various law enforcement officials and agencies. Wolk claimed he was injured by tear gas, flashbang grenades, pepper spray, and rubber bullets used by officers during the protests, resulting in chronic knee pain. The district court denied the defendant's motions to dismiss most of the claims but dismissed his Fourteenth Amendment due process claim. The defendants appealed the decision.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit reviewed the case. The court reversed the district court's denial of the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources' (D.N.R.) motion to dismiss, citing Eleventh Amendment immunity. The court also reversed the denial of qualified immunity for former Brooklyn Center Police Chief Tim Gannon, as he had resigned before Wolk's injuries occurred. Additionally, the court found that the Fourth Amendment claims for excessive force and failure to intervene were not clearly established as constitutional violations at the time of the incident, granting qualified immunity to the supervisory defendants on these claims.

However, the court affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity for the First Amendment retaliation claims against the supervisory defendants, except for Gannon. The court found that more facts were needed to determine whether the officers' actions were driven by retaliatory animus. The court also reversed the district court's denial of the supervisory defendants' motion to dismiss the civil conspiracy claims, finding the allegations insufficient to show a meeting of the minds. 

The court reversed the district court's denial of the municipal defendants' motion to dismiss the Fourth Amendment and conspiracy claims but lacked jurisdiction over the First Amendment retaliation claim against the municipal defendants. The case was remanded for further proceedings consistent with the opinion.
