---
source: "17 28APR2023.docx"
tags:
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Procedure
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
---

BF 28APR2023

United States v. Patrick Medearis

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-1841

Opinion Date: April 24, 2023

Judge: KOBES

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Police went to arrest Defendant for an incident that happened the day before. Defendant fled first on an ATV and then in a car. Once stopped, Defendant was sent to the hospital to receive medical attention. Meanwhile, officers searched Defendant’s car, finding guns and ammunition. A grand jury indicted Defendant for being a prohibited person in possession of a firearm. Defendant moved to suppress his statements, arguing that his Miranda waiver was invalid. The district court denied the motion. Defendant then moved in limine to exclude testimony that he had or used a gun in connection with the incident that led police to confront him on April 22. The district court granted the motion in part, prohibiting the Government from presenting hearsay testimony about the gun. Defendant also moved in limine to exclude evidence of his second flight from police, which was denied.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that here, the totality of the circumstances suggests that Defendant voluntarily, knowingly, and intelligently waived his rights. He was not intimidated, coerced, or deceived. On the contrary, officers ensured Defendant appreciated the rights he was waiving, told him that it was his decision to talk, and advised him that he could end the interview at any time. The evidence at trial showed that on the day the guns were discovered, police watched Defendant get in a car and drive off. When the pursuit ended, police found two guns in the passenger seat.

New Hampshire v. O'Brien

Court: New Hampshire Supreme Court

Docket: 2022-0081

Opinion Date: April 26, 2023

Judge: Donovan

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant LeeAnn O’Brien was convicted by jury of possession of a narcotic drug and control of a vehicle where a controlled drug was illegally kept. On appeal, she argued the superior court erred by denying her motion to suppress evidence seized pursuant to a search of her vehicle following a motor vehicle stop. After review, the New Hampshire Supreme Court concluded the officer unlawfully expanded the scope of the stop for a defective license plate light by requesting the defendant’s consent to search her vehicle for drugs. Accordingly, judgment was reversed and remanded.

Massey v. Texas

Court: Texas Court of Criminal Appeals

Docket: PD-0170-22

Opinion Date: April 26, 2023

Judge: Yeary

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

After legally detaining Appellant James Massey for lack of a proper registration sticker on his truck, an officer conducted an investigative pat-down search of Appellant. When Appellant forcefully resisted that search, the officer tased and handcuffed him. The officer subsequently discovered methamphetamine on the ground near where Appellant had been standing. Appellant moved to suppress the methamphetamine. In response to that motion, the trial court decided that the officer’s investigative pat-down search (a "Terry" search) was illegal. But the trial court nevertheless concluded that the taint of the illegal Terry search was attenuated by Appellant’s commission of the dual offenses of resisting search and evading detention. As a result, the trial court denied his motion. The court of appeals reversed, finding Appellant’s commission of resisting search and evading detention in response to the officer’s unlawful pat-down did not constitute “a severe departure from the common, if regrettable, range of responses” that should be expected. It therefore concluded that these offenses did not “constitute intervening circumstances” for purposes of an attenuation-of-taint analysis. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals determined the trial court properly denied Appellant’s motion to suppress the methamphetamine. Accordingly, the court of appeals judgment was reversed.

Casondra Pollreis v. Lamont Marzolf

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 21-3267

Opinion Date: April 27, 2023

Judge: GRASZ

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Procedure, Civil Rights, Constitutional Law

Plaintiff saw Defendant, an officer, pointing a firearm at her 12- and 14-year-old sons down the street from their family’s home. When Plaintiff approached to ask what happened, Defendant repeatedly ordered her to “get back.” After Plaintiff questioned the order, Defendant briefly pointed his taser at her. Plainitff then complied with his orders. Her sons were eventually cleared of any wrongdoing. Plaintiff filed a 42 U.S.C. Section 1983 action against Defendant, claiming he used excessive force. The district court granted summary judgment to Defendant on the claim after concluding he was entitled to qualified immunity. Defendant appealed.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that Defendant was placed in a position where he had two possibly armed suspects detained in front of him and a third unknown individual approaching from behind, creating a potentially serious safety risk. Adding to the circumstances, when Defendant ordered Plaintiff to “get back,” she moved to the side, but she did not immediately comply by moving backward. Rather, she questioned the order and moved sideways. Ordered to get back a second time, she again questioned the order and remained where she was until after the taser was drawn. Accordingly, the court wrote that under the totality of the circumstances, Defendant momentarily pointing his taser at Plaintiff to gain control of the scene was not unreasonable.
