---
source: "18 5MAY2023.docx"
tags:
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Procedure
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
---

BF 5MAY2023

United States v. William Stevenson

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-2538

Opinion Date: May 3, 2023

Judge: BENTON

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Police observed Defendant leaving a hotel room just after they had secured a search warrant for the room. Within minutes, they detained and arrested him. They found methamphetamine on his person and more in the room. After the district court refused to suppress the drugs found on his person, a jury convicted Defendant of conspiracy to distribute a controlled substance. Defendant appealed the denial of his motion to suppress.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that the officers believed that Defendant’s hotel room contained firearms, had seen him giving a hard stare and clutching his waistband, and suspected him of “engaging in drug trafficking, which very often is accompanied by dangerous weapons.” Drawing guns before approaching Defendant was reasonable. Nor did officers err by deploying a taser because, by then, Defendant’s acts had provided probable cause for an arrest. Further, the court found that the officers had reasonable suspicion to detain Defendant and used reasonable force to detain him. When Defendant’s acts created probable cause for an arrest, they used appropriate force to arrest him. Their acts did not violate the Fourth Amendment.

United States v. Porter

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit

Docket: 22-1134

Opinion Date: May 2, 2023

Judge: Paul Joseph Kelly, Jr.

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant-Appellant Aaron Porter entered a conditional plea of guilty to one count of being a felon in possession of a firearm, and was sentenced to 43 months’ imprisonment and three years’ supervised release. He reserved the right to appeal the denial of his motion to suppress a firearm found inside of his backpack. On appeal, to the Tenth Circuit, he argued that the Denver police conducted a warrantless search of his backpack and that the district court erred in finding that: (1) he had abandoned the backpack; and (2) the firearm would have been discovered pursuant to an inventory search. Finding no reversible error, the Tenth Circuit affirmed Porter's conviction and sentence.

New Jersey v. Miranda

Court: Supreme Court of New Jersey

Docket: A-67-21

Opinion Date: May 3, 2023

Judge: Anne M. Patterson

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

In July 2019, N.D. and her adult daughter and son appeared at the headquarters of the Borough of Highlands Police Department. They spoke with the two officers on duty that day, Captain George Roxby and Detective Nicholas Riker. N.D. told the officers that she and defendant Anthony Miranda had been dating since 2015, and that defendant had assaulted her. N.D. showed the officers photographs of injuries. She presented to the officers screenshots of threatening text messages that she attributed to defendant. N.D. reported that defendant had brandished two guns in front of her and her children. She said that defendant kept the guns in a “black drawstring-type bag” in the residential trailer in which she, her children, and defendant lived. The officers contacted a judge, who entered a temporary restraining order against defendant and a search warrant for the residential trailer where defendant and N.D. lived. Roxby and Riker arrived at the residential trailer and knocked on the door. Defendant answered, and Roxby arrested him. Roxby entered the residential trailer to execute the search warrant but found no weapons. N.D. indicated there was storage to the trailer; N.D. identified the black bag in which guns and ammunition were found. Defendant was indicted, and he moved to suppress the weapons found in the black bag in the storage trailer. The trial court denied defendant’s motion, concluding that N.D. had consented to the search of the storage trailer and the seizure of the weapons found in the black bag in that trailer, and that the black bag containing the weapons was in plain view. The Appellate Division affirmed. The New Jersey Supreme Court determined N.D. had apparent authority to consent to the officer’s search of the storage trailer. However, the exigent-circumstances exception to the warrant requirement did not justify the officer’s search of the black bag or his seizure of the weapons in that bag, and the denial of defendant’s motion to suppress constituted error.

Curtis Baker v. City of Madison, Alabama, et al.

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit

Docket: 22-10732

Opinion Date: May 3, 2023

Judge: HULL

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Procedure, Civil Rights, Constitutional Law

Plaintiff alleged (1) Officer N. used excessive force when he tased Plaintiff at the scene of an automobile wreck, (2) Officer H. failed to intervene to prevent Officer N’s excessive force, and (3) the City of Madison, Alabama admitted the officers’ actions were the result of its municipal policy. Relying on body camera footage, Defendants Officer N., Officer H., and the City moved to dismiss. The district court granted their motions to dismiss. On appeal, Plaintiff argued the district court erred by (1) considering the officers’ body camera footage when ruling on Defendants’ motions to dismiss without converting them into summary judgment motions, (2) granting qualified immunity to Officer N., (3) dismissing Plaintiff’s failure-to-intervene claim against Officer H., and (4) dismissing his municipal liability claim against the City.

The Eleventh Circuit affirmed. The court concluded that the district court properly considered the body camera footage, correctly ruled that Officer N. did not violate a constitutional right and thus Officer H. had no duty to intervene and accurately determined that Plaintiff’s claim against the City failed as a matter of law. The court explained Officer N.’s use of the taser was justified because of (1) Plaintiff’s repeated failure to comply with Officer N.’s commands, (2) Plaintiff’s unsafe driving that had just caused an automobile accident, (3) Plaintiff’s repeated efforts to get back in the vehicle, (4) Plaintiff’s physical resistance to Officer N.’s attempts to remove him from the vehicle, and (5) the tense, uncertain, and rapidly evolving series of events. Thus, the court concluded that Officer N.’s single use of a taser in dart mode was objectively reasonable.
