---
source: "2 13JAN2023.docx"
tags:  []
---

CASES 13JAN2023

United States v. Qin
Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Opinion Date: January 9, 2023

The First Circuit affirmed the judgment of the district court convicting Defendant of conspiracy to commit export violations, visa fraud, making false statements to federal agents, money laundering, and smuggling, holding that the search of Defendant's laptop and cellular phone was a constitutional search.

Defendant, a Chinese national, was stopped by Customs and Border Patrol agents upon his arrival to the United States after a trip to China. Agents seized Defendant's electronic devices for a further search. Defendant was indicted based on evidence during the warrantless search of his devices. The First Circuit affirmed, holding that neither probable cause nor a warrant was required for the search in this case to be lawful.

US v. Ervin Leggette
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 10, 2023

Defendant and another person were trespassing in a public park after it closed. When officers saw their car, they investigated the trespass. The officers found a gun abandoned in a nearby trash can, so they frisked Defendant and questioned him about the gun. After first denying the gun was his, Defendant admitted he was a felon and that he owned the gun. The officers arrested Defendant, who was then federally indicted for being a felon in possession of a firearm. He sought to suppress his incriminatory statements, arguing that his statements in the park were inadmissible because he was “in custody” under Miranda, and so the officers needed to read him his Miranda rights before questioning him about the gun. The district court disagreed, and Defendant pleaded guilty.

The Fourth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that Miranda warnings are not required every time an individual has their freedom of movement restrained by a police officer. Nor are they necessarily required every time “questioning imposes some sort of pressure on suspects to confess to their crimes.” Instead, they are required only when a suspect’s freedom of movement is restrained to the point where they do not feel free to terminate the encounter, and the circumstances reveal “the same inherently coercive pressures as the type of station house questioning at issue in Miranda.” The court found that, in this case, no such pressures existed.

United States v. Loines
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2023

Detective Kopchak, investigating drug trafficking, observed Rivers leaving a house, driving a red Nissan Ultima to sell drugs to an informant, and returning to the same house. After days of surveillance, investigators determined that Rivers lived at the house, and executed a search warrant. Kopchak again observed the Nissan, looked through its window, and allegedly observed a cigar wrapper, a piece of paper in the center console, and a small plastic bag that he identified as “a bag of dope.” Lieutenant DiPenti verbally indicated that he also saw the “bag of dope.” Officers found Loines and others in Rivers’ residence and read them their Miranda rights. Loines volunteered that car keys, belonging to the Nissan, were his. The car was towed for an inventory search. Officers took a picture of the car’s center console, showing a small plastic bag underneath a cigar wrapper, with a lottery ticket beside it. Officers searched the vehicle and found a firearm, two bags of suspected narcotics, and a scale. Police did not obtain a warrant to search the automobile.

Loines, charged with drug crimes under 21 U.S.C. 846, 841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(C), and a firearm offense, 18 U.S.C. 924(c)(1)(A), unsuccessfully moved to suppress the evidence seized from his vehicle. The Sixth Circuit reversed; the “bag of dope” was not in plain view, there was no probable cause to search the vehicle, and the government did not satisfy the automobile exception to the warrant requirement.

United States v. Ronald Finley, Jr.
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 9, 2023

Defendants (D1 and D2) were each convicted of unlawfully possessing a firearm, in violation of 18 U.S.C. Sections 922(g)(1) and 924(a)(2) after the district court denied their motions to suppress. On appeal, Defendants challenged the district court's denial of their motions to suppress. D2 also challenged the court's withholding of the juror questionnaires that were completed during voir dire.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of D2's motion to suppress, finding that officers arrested him after he fled from them, at which point they had probable cause to arrest him for fleeing with intent to avoid arrest. However, the court remanded D2's case to the district court for the limited purpose of disclosing the completed questionnaires to defendant D2. Based on the record, the court could not conclude that the district court's questioning was adequate to determine if juror bias contributed to D2's conviction.

Derek Laney v. City of St. Louis, Missouri
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2023

Plaintiff argued with a police officer during a protest in downtown St. Louis. Defendant- Lieutenant saw the confrontation and, fearing for the other officer’s safety, pepper-sprayed him. Plaintiff alleged that the force used was both excessive and retaliatory the district court granted qualified immunity. Plaintiff brought excessive force and First Amendment retaliation claims against the Lieutenant and a municipal liability claim against the City of St. Louis.

The district court dismissed Plaintiff’s federal claims at summary judgment and declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over what remained. The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that Plaintiff’s arguments are just general complaints about the Lieutenant’s “true motivations, intentions, and testimonial fabrications.” None of these arguments make any difference because “evil intentions will not make a Fourth Amendment violation out of an objectively reasonable use of force.” Further, even viewing the facts in a light most favorable to Plaintiff, causation is missing. As Plaintiff acknowledged, the Lieutenant “was not even in the area” when he criticized the Bicycle Response Team. Nor did Plaintiff “have any interaction with him” during the mere seconds between the beginning of the incident and the use of pepper spray. Accordingly, the court’s conclusion that the Lieutenant did not violate Plaintiff’s First or Fourth Amendment rights also forecloses his constitutional claims against the City of St. Louis.
