---
source: "25 23JUN2023.docx"
tags:
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Government-&-Administrative-Law
  - Immigration-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Personal-Injury
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
---

23 JUNE 2023

United States v. Balser

Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit

Docket: 21-1813

Opinion Date: June 16, 2023

Judge: Ojetta Rogeriee Thompson

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the district court denying Defendant's motion to suppress evidence of drugs and entering judgment on Defendant's plea of guilty to possession of cocaine with intent to distribute, holding that there was no error or abuse of discretion.

Defendant was pulled over by a New Hampshire police officer, Stephen DiChiara, following a suspected drug buy. DiChiara was asked to conduct the stop by a United States Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) task force officer, DiChiara stoped and seized the car Defendant was driving. A subsequent search of the car revealed uncovered roughly one kilogram of cocaine. Defendant moved to suppress evidence of the drugs, arguing that DiChiara could not act solely on the DEA officer's probable cause. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the directive given to DiChiara was sufficient to attribute the DEA officer's probable cause to DiChiara.

US v. Xavier Howell

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit

Docket: 21-4634

Opinion Date: June 22, 2023

Judge: NIEMEYER

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Suspecting that Defendant was engaged in drug-trafficking activity, law enforcement officers in Chesapeake, Virginia, stopped the vehicle he was driving to investigate. After a drug dog alerted to the presence of drugs, the officers searched the vehicle and recovered methamphetamine and related evidence. After Defendant was charged with drug trafficking offenses, he filed a motion to suppress the evidence recovered from his vehicle (and later from his apartment), contending (1) that the officers did not have a reasonable suspicion to make the stop and (2) that, in any event, they unduly prolonged the stop — all in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights. The district court denied his motion.

The Fourth Circuit affirmed. The court concluded that the totality of the circumstances supported a reasonable suspicion of ongoing criminal activity, justifying a brief stop to allay the officer’s suspicion. In this case, the investigatory stop did not allay that suspicion but confirmed it. Shortly after the stop, a drug dog alerted to the presence of drugs in Defendant’s vehicle, leading to the recovery of drugs and other evidence used in this case. Further, the mission of the stop was to investigate potential drug-trafficking activity, and there is no evidence in the record to suggest that the officers failed to “diligently pursue” their investigation to confirm or allay that suspicion.

Anibowei v. Morgan

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 20-10059

Opinion Date: June 19, 2023

Judge: Priscilla Richman

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law, Government & Administrative Law, Immigration Law

Plaintiff alleged that government agents searched his cell phone at the border without a warrant on at least five occasions and that agents copied data from his cell phone at least once. Plaintiff sued the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), U.S. Customs and Border Protection (CBP), U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), the Transportation Security Administration (TSA), and the respective heads of each entity in their official capacity (collectively, the government), challenging the searches, as well as ICE and CBP policies regarding border searches of electronic devices. In the district court, Plaintiff filed a motion seeking, among other relief, a preliminary injunction preventing the government from searching his cell phone at the border without a warrant. The district court denied the preliminary injunction.

The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that Plaintiff failed to demonstrate a substantial threat he will suffer irreparable injury if the injunction is not granted. The court reasoned that Plaintiff has demonstrated that the ICE and CBP policies authorize warrantless searches. Further, the allegations in Plaintiff’s verified complaint are evidence of a pattern of warrantless searches of Plaintiff’s cell phone. However, Plaintiff has no additional evidence to establish that he will be stopped by border agents in the future and that the agents will search his cell phone without a warrant.

USA v. Castillo

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 21-50406

Opinion Date: June 19, 2023

Judge: James C. Ho

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court’s judgment convicting and sentencing Defendant on six charges involving child pornography. The court held that no reasonable suspicion is necessary to conduct the sort of routine manual cell phone search at the border that occurred here.Defendant and two others crossed the international bridge to Presidio, Texas, in a recreational vehicle (RV) that was towing a passenger car behind it. Upon reaching the port of entry into the United States, the RV was sent to secondary inspection. Defendant was placed in a holding cell. He admitted to owning the contraband. He also provided the passcode to unlock his cell phone to a Homeland Security Investigations special agent. The agent manually scrolled through various apps. As a result, he found what he believed to be child pornography in the photo section of Defendant’s phone. Defendant was indicted on six charges involving child pornography. He subsequently moved to suppress the evidence obtained from the search of his devices. After a hearing, the district court refused to suppress the child pornography. Defendant was found guilty on all six counts and sentenced to 720 months imprisonment and a life term of supervised release. He filed a timely notice of appeal.

The Fifth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that the border search exception is a “longstanding, historically recognized exception to the Fourth Amendment’s general principle that a warrant be obtained” for a search. Courts have allowed a variety of border searches without requiring either a warrant or reasonable suspicion. The extent of the privacy intrusion, however, will depend on the methodology employed by the government agent. The court held that no reasonable suspicion is necessary to conduct the sort of routine manual cell phone search at the border that occurred here.

USA v. Khalil Jackson

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit

Docket: 21-2811

Opinion Date: June 16, 2023

Judge: Hamilton

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant was arrested on several counts of sex trafficking a minor, child pornography and cyberstalking. A jury convicted Defendant on all counts, and he was sentenced to forty years in prison.

Defendant appealed on two issues. First, the district court erred in admitting his confession to detectives. However, each of the challenged statements were made after Defendant was Mirandized. While Defendant indicated prior to this point that he would "rather have a lawyer," even if that statement invoked his right to counsel, subsequent re-initiation of the conversation by Defendant waived his right to counsel.

Second, Defendant claimed the district court erred in refusing to provide a limiting instruction related to three threatening voicemails Defendant left for members of the victim's family. These statements were "other acts" admissible under Fed. R. Evid. 404(b)(1).

DEJUAN HOPSON V. JACOB ALEXANDER, ET AL

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit

Docket: 21-16706

Opinion Date: June 16, 2023

Judge: Bress

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law, Personal Injury

Believing that two men were about to engage in the armed robbery of a gas station, defendant police officers ("Defendants") approached the
Plaintiff's’ vehicle with guns pointed and forcibly removed him. The district court denied the Defendants' claim to qualified immunity, and the Defendants appealed.

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit reversed. First, it was not clearly established that the officers lacked an objectively reasonable belief that criminal activity was about to occur. Second, clearly established law did not prevent the officers from suspecting Plaintiff might be armed. Here, Defendants believed Plaintiff was about to commit and armed robbery, which is a crime typically involving the use of a weapon. Nothing gave the panel any reason to second guess the officer's "on the ground" determination.

The court also rejected Plaintiff’s claim that it was a violation of a clearly established right to point a firearm at the Plaintiff and demand he exits his vehicle without first identifying themselves as law enforcement.

United States v. Alqahtani

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit

*Probable Cause in warrant establish by anonymous witness*

Opinion Date: June 21, 2023

Judge: David M. Ebel

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant-Appellant Hassan Alqahtani was convicted for illegally possessing a firearm and sentenced to 30 months in prison. The gun was discovered after Special Agent Jonathan Labuhn received a tip that Alqahtani was unlawfully in possession of a firearm, prompting Labuhn to begin an investigation. Alqahtani appealed his conviction and sentence, arguing: (1) the warrant application failed to establish probable cause to search his residence, and that the affidavit supporting the application contained material misstatements and omissions; (2) the district court improperly granted the Government’s peremptory challenge to the only Black member of the jury venire; (3) the district court impermissibly admitted hearsay testimony concerning statements made by Alqahtani’s wife to a Task Force Officer; (4) the district court improperly applied a four-level sentencing enhancement on the theory that Alqahtani had previously used the gun at issue here in connection with another felony. Finding no reversible error, the Tenth Circuit affirmed Alqahtani's conviction.

State v. Elias

Court: Nebraska Supreme Court

Citation: 314 Neb. 494

Opinion Date: June 16, 2023

Cell Tower dump of live connection data was not a historical search as per Carpenter and therefore was NOT a search under the Fourth Amendment

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court affirmed Defendant's conviction of second degree murder, unlawful discharge of a firearm, and two counts of use of a weapon to commit a felony, holding that there was no error in the trial judge's evidentiary rulings.

On appeal, Defendant argued that the district court erred in admitting evidence of his character, specifically that he conducted drug deals after the murder, he was the victim of a robbery, and he owned firearms. Defendant also challenged cellular telephone information obtained from a "tower dump." The Supreme Court affirmed, holding (1) there was no error in the admission of the challenged evidence; and (2) even if the cell phone tower dump was not a search and subject to Fourth Amendment protections, the order under 18 U.S.C. 86-2,106 allowing the dump was executed in good faith.

New Jersey v. Cohen

Court: Supreme Court of New Jersey

Docket: A-50-21

Opinion Date: June 22, 2023

Warrantless search of automobile beyond passenger compartment was beyond the scope of the probable cause based on odor of raw marijuana. 

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

After receiving a “be on the lookout” (BOLO) email based on a tip from a confidential informant (CI) that defendant Cornelius Cohen would be traveling to the Carolinas to pick up firearms and bring them back to New Jersey to sell, State Trooper Charles Travis noticed one of the cars described in the BOLO email traveling on the New Jersey Turnpike, and pulled the vehicle over for traffic violations. When Travis approached the vehicle, he noticed multiple air fresheners hanging from the rearview mirror. Travis testified that he smelled “a strong odor of raw marijuana” in the vehicle during the stop and observed “greenish-brown vegetation” on the driver’s beard and shirt, which the trooper identified as marijuana. With defendant and his passenger handcuffed and in separate patrol cars, Travis started searching the passenger compartment, where he recovered from the glove compartment a 9mm spent shell casing. The search of the passenger compartment did not reveal any marijuana. Travis did not apply for a search warrant based on the information supplied by the CI, but instead proceeded to the front of the vehicle where he opened the vehicle’s hood and searched the engine compartment. There he found a rifle and a revolver. Travis then searched the trunk, where he found a duffle bag containing hollow point bullets. No marijuana was recovered from the car, defendant, or the passenger. Defendant moved to suppress the evidence seized during the car search. The trial court held that “[t]he odor of raw marijuana emanating from a vehicle without a detectible pinpoint establishes probable cause to search the entire vehicle.” Defendant subsequently entered a conditional guilty plea to one count of unlawful possession of a weapon, and appealed his eventual conviction. The New Jersey Supreme Court concluded that expanding the search to the engine compartment and trunk went beyond the scope of the automobile exception. As a result, the seized evidence should be suppressed.

New Jersey v. Erazo

Court: Supreme Court of New Jersey

Docket: A-16-22

Opinion Date: June 21, 2023

Miranda waiver was VIKing

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant Andreas Erazo was convicted for the 2017 rape and murder of eleven-year-old A.S. The Appellate Division found that defendant’s confession, obtained during a second interview, five hours after his initial 90-minute interview, was not knowing, intelligent and voluntary, and should have been suppressed. The New Jersey Supreme Court reversed, finding defendant was not in custody at the time of the pre-confession interview, thus Miranda was not implicated. The Supreme Court also found that the detectives’ tactics during the Mirandized interrogation were not coercive, did not minimize the Miranda warnings, and were consistent with New Jersey v. Sims, 250 N.J. 189 (2022). Thus, under the totality of the circumstances, defendant’s Miranda waiver was knowing, intelligent, and voluntary, and the trial court properly denied his motion to suppress.

State v. Sinapi

Court: Rhode Island Supreme Court

Dockets: 19-388, 19-415

Opinion Date: June 20, 2023

Real-time CSLI is a search that requires a warrant, but exigent circumstances applied.

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court affirmed the judgments of the superior court convicting Defendant following a jury trial for larceny of an automobile and adjudicating him a probation violator, holding that Defendant was not entitled to relief on his claims of error.

On appeal, Defendant argued, among other things, that the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress certain evidence collected as a result of a warrantless search of his real-time cell-site location information (CSLI). The Supreme Court disagreed and affirmed, holding (1) the acquisition of real-time CSLI qualifies as a search under the Fourth Amendment for which a warrant is required; (2) any error in the trial justice's determination that the exigent circumstances exception to the warrant requirement applied to the facts of this case was harmless; (3) the trial justice did not abuse his discretion in denying Defendant's motion to exclude certain testimony, and any error in allowing other testimony to be admitted at trial was harmless; and (4) Defendant waived his last argument for appeal.

State v. Moore

Court: Wisconsin Supreme Court

Docket: 2021AP000938-CR

Opinion Date: June 20, 2023

Judge: Hagedorn

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the court of appeals affirming the decision of the circuit court to suppress the results of a search of Defendant, holding that the law enforcement officers had probable cause to arrest Defendant, and therefore, the underlying search was a lawful search incident to arrest.

A police officer executed a traffic stop of Defendant for speeding and, during her initial contact with Defendant, "detected an odor of raw marijuana." The officer called for back-up, and two officers escorted Defendant out of the vehicle. The officers proceeded to search Defendant based on the odor of marijuana and found two baggies containing cocaine and fentanyl. Defendant filed a motion to suppress on the grounds that the State lacked probable cause to arrest and search him. The circuit court granted the motion, and the court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that, under the totality of the circumstances, the officers had probable cause to arrest Defendant on the belief that he was committing or had committed a crime, and therefore, there was no Fourth Amendment violation.
