---
source: "3 20JAN2023.docx"
tags:  []
---

CASES 20JAN2023

USA v. Wright
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 18, 2023

At issue is whether Defendant was seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment when an officer, with emergency lights engaged, pulled behind Wright’s parked vehicle, and he did not attempt to flee or terminate the encounter but failed to comply fully with the officer’s commands. The district court, at the end of an evidentiary hearing, however, denied Defendant’s motion to suppress, concluding erroneously that the Terry stop was initiated instead at a later point in the encounter.

The Fifth Circuit, while retaining jurisdiction over the appeal, remanded to the district court for it, based on the record developed at the suppression hearing, to prepare expeditiously written findings of fact and conclusions of law on whether the seizure at the earlier point in time was in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The court explained that Defendant not complying fully with some of the Officer’s commands was improper, to say the least, but his behavior does not show defiance of the Officer’s authority. Defendant sufficiently submitted to the show of authority because he objectively appeared to believe he was not free to leave, and he did not attempt to flee, nor terminate the encounter. The court further explained that because the district court’s findings and conclusions turn instead on events occurring after the Terry stop, the court is unable to deduce from them whether the district court concluded the totality of the circumstances prior to the Officer’s pulling behind Wright’s vehicle provided reasonable suspicion justifying the stop.

United States v. Justin Treanton
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 18, 2023

Defendant pleaded guilty to two child pornography offenses. The district court sentenced him to 600 months’ imprisonment. On appeal, Defendant challenges the district court’s denial of his motion to suppress evidence, and the sentence imposed. Defendant argued that the district court erred by denying his motion to suppress statements from his interview.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the judgment, concluding there was no reversible error. The court explained that circumstances do not establish that Defendant was in custody during the interview. Agents did not physically restrain him in the vehicle. Only two agents questioned him, and they repeatedly told Defendant that he was not under arrest and was free to leave. The agents were not deceptive or threatening, and Defendant voluntarily answered their questions. The court reasoned with the district court that a reasonable person in Defendant’s position would have believed that he was free to terminate the interview if he wished. Considering the totality of the circumstances, the court concluded Defendant was not in custody for purposes of Miranda, and that the district court properly declined to suppress incriminating statements made during the interview before agents informed Defendant that he would be arrested.

Further, the court held that the district court properly considered the factors under 18 U.S.C. Section 3553(a), and elected to impose Defendant’s advisory guideline sentence. The court saw no compelling circumstances in support of a shorter sentence that demonstrate an abuse of the district court’s discretion.

Brian Bresnahan v. City of St. Peters
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 19, 2023

Plaintiff alleged that Police officers in the St. Peters Police Department created a text messaging group to update each other about local Black Lives Matter (BLM) protests. Although the text group was intended for official purposes, specifically for officers to share up-to-date information about local BLM protests, they also shared “unrelated” content. Plaintiff sent the group a video from an animated sitcom called “Paradise PD.” It showed a black police officer who accidentally shot himself with a media headline stating, “another innocent black man shot by a cop.” According to Plaintiff, the video was satire and a parody of the BLM protests. The next morning, the Police Chief berated Plaintiff, ordered him to resign, and told him that if he refused, Plaintiff would open an investigation and recommend to City Administrator that Plaintiff be fired. Plaintiff resigned and filed a lawsuit under Section 1983, alleging that he was retaliated against for exercising his First Amendment right to free speech. Defendants moved to dismiss, and the district court granted their motion.

The Eighth Circuit reversed and remanded. The court reasoned that based on the allegations in the complaint, the group text was used to send both work-related and unrelated messages, and Plaintiff’s video was such an unrelated message. The court explained that while Plaintiff has met the threshold showing required to advance his First Amendment claim, the court expressed no opinion on the merits of that claim.
