---
source: "30 28JUL2023.docx"
tags:  []
---

CASES 28JUL2023

Perez v. Borough of Johnsonburg
US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
July 21, 2023

Johnsonburg, Pennsylvania Police Officer Cuneo learned that the St. Marys Police Department had a search warrant to obtain a DNA sample from Perez. Cuneo knew Perez, a local with a history of illegal drug use. A log entry instructed officers who saw Perez to “hold” him and call St. Marys. Cuneo knew that Perez’s DNA had been found at the scene of a recent drug house burglary. Cuneo inferred—mistakenly—that a “body” warrant also had been issued. Later, sitting in his cruiser, Cuneo spotted Perez. The men stood on the sidewalk, having a “friendly conversation.” When Cuneo mentioned the DNA warrant and told Perez he needed to take him into custody. Perez said he was going home and sprinted away.

Cuneo pursued Perez. Perez says he was tased from behind without warning. Cuneo says he warned Perez to stop before tasing him. Perez fell forward, breaking his nose. Cuneo radioed for backup and medical assistance. Perez recovered; a physical altercation ensued. Cuneo repeatedly tased and struck Perez with his baton, then shot Perez in the back.

In a suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, Cuneo asserted qualified immunity in defense. The court denied Cuneo’s summary judgment motion as to his use of his firearm and the unlawful seizure claim. The Third Circuit reversed in part. The Third Circuit held that since Perez did not yield to the show of authority from Officer Cuneo, Perez was not seized during their initial encounter. The court remanded so Perez’s excessive force claim for Cuneo’s use of his firearm can proceed.

Show of authority - attempted seizure

3-3

Boyd v. McNamara
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
July 24, 2023

Plaintiff was repeatedly tased while he was a pretrial detainee at the McLennan County jail in Waco, Texas. Plaintiff insists that he did nothing to warrant the use of force—that he was neither threatening nor resisting the officer who tased him. The principal question on appeal is whether Plaintiff has presented sufficient evidence to defeat summary judgment on his ensuing civil rights claims.

The Fifth Circuit reversed summary judgment on Plaintiff’s excessive force claim against Defendant and remanded that claim to the district court for trial. The court held that a rational jury could find that Defendant’s decision to tase Plaintiff was not justified by any exigency, in which case Defendant’s qualified immunity defense would not shield him from liability because the court’s precedents clearly establish that resort to force in such circumstances is unconstitutional. The court held that if a jury finds that Defendant tased a non-threatening, compliant inmate, then he is not entitled to qualified immunity.

8-4
United States v. Wright
Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
July 25, 2023

The Defendant was indicted on one count of being a felon in possession of a firearm. He moved to suppress the evidence of the weapon, claiming that the gun was the fruit of an unlawful seizure because the officer lacked reasonable suspicion to initiate a Terry Stop. The district court orally denied the motion to suppress after a live hearing based on testimony from the officer and the tipster. Defendant entered a conditional guilty plea, reserving the right to appeal the denial. After the court entered a judgment of conviction, Defendant timely appealed.

The Fifth Circuit concluded that the police had reasonable suspicion to seize Defendant and thus lawfully obtained the incriminating evidence from his car. The court explained that the contemporaneous tip, the visual details that the officer confirmed, the high-crime area, and Defendant’s evasive response to police presence was enough to give an officer articulable suspicion that crime was occurring or was about to occur. The court reasoned that to conclude otherwise would raise the bar of reasonable suspicion and hamper law enforcement from engaging in essential investigatory actions.

1-7, 6-7

United States v. Smith
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
July 24, 2023

D.B. left a Detroit and believed he was being followed by a silver sedan. At 1:41:01 a.m., a traffic camera captured D.B. driving through an intersection, followed by the silver sedan less than a minute later. Minutes later, about 2-½ miles away, an individual in a silver sedan shot D.B. Surveillance video captured muzzle flashes coming from a silver sedan described as looking like a Chevy Malibu. The only silver sedan that could be placed in D.B.’s proximity around the time of the shooting was Smith’s Chevy Malibu. D.B. later picked Smith out of a photographic lineup as someone he had an argument with in the past.

Smith’s car was tagged in Michigan’s Law Enforcement Information Network, with a warning that the car’s occupants were armed. Days later, an officer stopped Smith’s car and frisked Smith for weapons. Smith stated there was a gun in a case in the car. The trooper performed what he called a “protective sweep” of the areas within a driver’s reach and found a handgun with a chambered bullet and a baggie containing fentanyl and heroin. Smith unsuccessfully moved to have the evidence suppressed as fruit of an unreasonable search. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion. The police had reasonable suspicion to stop Smith and perform a limited search. 

LEO LAW NOTE: The court’s analysis was totally focused on the reasonable suspicion to make the Terry Stop of the automobile.  The opinion was totally devoid of analysis supporting the Terry Frisk (or “protective sweep”) of the automobile. The court affirmed the limited search of the automobile without analysis.
1-7, 6-7, 5-4

Benedda Cotten v. Ryan Miller
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 24, 2023

The plaintiffs sued police officers under Sec. 1983 after the officers made warrantless entry into their apartment. The district court granted summary judgment to the plaintiffs and the defendants appealed.

On appeal, the Eighth Circuit reversed. While warrantless searches are presumptively unreasonable, there is an exception when officers act with probable cause to believe that a crime has been committed and an objectively reasonable basis to believe that and emergency exigency exist.

Here, the officers were dispatched to the scene in response to a report of domestic violence. The report received by the officers explained that the 911 call came from a neighbor who thought abuse was occurring. The neighbor stated that a woman, her boyfriend, and a child lived in the apartment and she heard a verbal argument, someone being thrown around, and yelling and screaming in the upstairs apartment. The court held that this created an emergency exigency, justifying warrantless entry.

5-10

Kelly Martin v. Jordan Turner
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 21, 2023

The Eighth Circuit reversed the district court’s ruling denying the Deputy’s motion for qualified immunity in Plaintiff’s lawsuit, alleging that the Deputy’s conduct amounted to deliberate indifference to her seizure condition after she was arrested for driving while intoxicated. The Deputy asserted qualified immunity in his motion for summary judgment, which the district court denied. 

The court explained that the Deputy promptly attended to Plaintiff and asked her whether she was hurt or suffered from medical problems. She said no and did not advise him of her seizure disorder. Emergency medical personnel also observed Plaintiff and were content not to take her to the hospital, advising the Deputy that she had refused further treatment. He then took Plaintiff and her medications to jail. Barton I did not provide the Deputy with fair notice that his failure to seek further medical treatment for Plaintiff or to speak with the jailors about what Plaintiff’s boyfriend told him constituted deliberate indifference. Thus, Plaintiff failed to show that clearly established law prohibited the Deputy’s conduct, and the Deputy is entitled to qualified immunity.

DELIBERATE INDIFFERENCE - NO APP TAG

Tonya-Marie Adams v. Nathan Trimble
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 24, 2023

Plaintiff, for her son A.H., sued Defendant Officer under 42 U.S.C. Section 1983, alleging he used excessive force by not giving a warning while searching with a police K9 trained to “bite and hold.” Trimble moved for summary judgment. The district court denied qualified immunity on the excessive force claim. Defendant appealed.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that there is no dispute that Defendant did not provide a warning when he deployed the canine Ace or when Ace alerted to fresh human odor during the search. The parties dispute whether A.H. heard the warnings from the other officers. A.H., lying underneath a trailer, testified he did not hear any warnings. The court wrote that assuming the facts most favorably to A.H., he did not hear the other officers’ warnings and did not have the opportunity to surrender. Defendant had fair notice from the court’s precedent that the failure to give a warning and an opportunity to surrender violated clearly established law.

8-4  WARNING BEFORE USE OF POLICE K-9

United States v. Nicholas Jones
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 24, 2023

Law enforcement officers organized controlled buys using a confidential informant. Initially, the defendant was not the target of the investigation. However, events transpired during the controlled buys that led the drug task force to suspect that the defendant and his wife were involved in illegal drug activity. As a result, they became the primary targets of the investigation.

Based on information from the controlled buy, law enforcement obtained a warrant to search Defendant's home, ultimately seizing $154,000, firearms, ammunition, marijuana, and handwritten notes apparently detailing narcotics sales.

Defendant sought suppression of the physical evidence, arguing that the warrant failed to establish probable caused and that it was based on false information. Defendant's motion cited inconsistencies with the affidavit. The district court rejected the defendant’s arguments, finding that, even if the statement were inaccurate, there was still enough to establish probable cause. The Eighth Circuit affirmed. Although the court agreed that the inaccuracies were concerning, when removed from the analysis, there was still probable cause for the warrant to issue.

1-6, 4-2

California v. Leal
California Courts of Appeal
July 25, 2023

Here, a police officer received information via a radio broadcast from another officer that a juvenile on probation with a firearm restriction likely placed a firearm under the front passenger seat in defendant Hilario Leal, Jr.’s car before defendant got into his car and drove away. Defendant’s car was under constant surveillance from the time of the alleged firearm placement until the searching officer conducted the search. When a search of the passenger compartment of defendant’s car yielded no firearm, the searching officer decided to search the trunk, where he discovered a firearm. Defendant was charged with several offenses and filed a motion to suppress the firearm; the trial court denied the motion. 

Defendant ultimately pled no contest to being a felon in possession of a firearm. The question presented was whether the search of defendant’s trunk was justified under the automobile exception. The Court of Appeal concluded it was not, holding that when an officer has probable cause to believe contraband or evidence of a crime will be found specifically in the passenger compartment of a vehicle (as compared to having probable cause to believe it will be found somewhere in the vehicle), and no other subsequent discovery or information provides further probable cause to believe the evidence will be found in the trunk, an officer’s search of the trunk exceeds the permissible scope of a warrantless search under the automobile exception. Judgment was reversed and the case remanded with directions to set aside the order denying defendant’s motion to suppress, enter an order granting the motion, and allow defendant to move to withdraw his plea.

5-13

Coalition on Homelessness v. City and County of San Francisco
California Courts of Appeal
July 21, 2023

In a challenge to the San Francisco Municipal Transportation Agency’s policy of towing safely and lawfully parked vehicles without a warrant based solely on the accrual of unpaid parking tickets, the Coalition argued that the warrantless tows are unreasonable seizures within the meaning of article I, section 13 of the California Constitution and the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The trial court denied a motion for a writ of mandate and declaratory and injunctive relief.

The court of appeal reversed, holding the challenged warrantless tows are not permissible under the vehicular community caretaking exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement. The defendants have not shown that legally parked cars with unpaid parking tickets that present no threat to public safety and the efficient movement of vehicular traffic as required to justify being towed under that exception. The court rejected an argument that the governmental interest in deterring parking violations and nonpayment of parking fines justifies warrantless tows under the vehicular community caretaking exception. The tows at issue may not be justified by analogy to warrantless property seizures in the forfeiture context.

5-20

State v. Li
Rhode Island Supreme Court
July 27, 2023

Junjie Li was operating a vehicle and Zhong Kuang was in the passenger seat when a law enforcement officer initiated a traffic stop. While conversing with Li, the officer noticed Li began to exhibit nervous behavior and detected an order of marijuana coming from inside Kuang's vehicle. After a dog sniff, officers discovered approximately ninety-four pounds of marijuana. Li and Kuang moved to suppress the marijuana. The trial justice granted the motions to suppress, holding that the extension of the traffic stop beyond its original scope was unreasonable because the officer did not have independent reasonable suspicion to prolong the stop. The Rhode Island Supreme Court vacated the orders of the superior court granting the defendants' motions to suppress the marijuana seized from one defendant's vehicle during a traffic stop, holding that the trial justice erred in granting the defendants' motions to suppress. The court held that the trial justice erred in concluding that the officer did not possess reasonable suspicion to prolong the stop based on the totality of the circumstances.

10-3
