---
source: "32 11AUG2023.docx"
tags:  []
---

CASES 11AUG2023

United States v. Daniels
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
August 9, 2023

Title 18 U.S.C. Section 922(g)(3) bars an individual from possessing a firearm if he is an “unlawful user” of a controlled substance. Patrick Daniels is one such “unlawful user”—he admitted to smoking marijuana multiple days per month. But the government presented no evidence that he was intoxicated at the time of arrest, nor did it identify when he last had used marijuana. Still, based on his confession to regular usage, a jury convicted Defendant of violating Section 922(g)(3). The question is whether Defendant’s conviction violates his right to bear arms. The answer depends on whether Section 922(g)(3) is consistent with the nation’s “historical tradition of firearm regulation.”

The Fifth Circuit reversed the judgment of conviction and render a dismissal of the indictment. The court explained that the nation’s history and tradition may support some limits on an intoxicated person’s right to carry a weapon, but it does not justify disarming a sober citizen based exclusively on his past drug usage. Nor do more generalized traditions of disarming dangerous persons support this restriction on nonviolent drug users. Thus, the court held that as applied to Defendant, then, Section 922(g)(3) violates the Second Amendment.

MARIJUANA USE WHILE POSSESSING FIREARMS

Raimey v. City of Niles, Ohio
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
August 10, 2023

Burroughs went to the Niles Municipal Court to pay a traffic fine. The electronic docketing system alerted court officials that there was an active warrant for Burroughs’s arrest, relating to a recent domestic violence incident. Zickefoose, a probation officer, followed Burroughs outside, commanded him to stop, and told him to put his hands behind his back. When Zickefoose tried to grab Burroughs’s forearm, he pulled away and ran toward the parking lot. Zickefoose was injured as Burroughs drove away and he reported the incident to the police. Four officers responded separately to Burroughs’s apartment complex, where they boxed in Burroughs’s car and yelled for Burroughs to “shut the car off” and “get out of the vehicle.” Officer Mannella fired three rounds into the windshield, which hit Burroughs in the chest, killing him. Officer Reppy fired an additional five shots that penetrated the car but did not hit Burroughs.

In a suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, the district court determined that a reasonable jury could find that when Mannella opened fire, Burroughs was moving slowly or was stationary and was complying with Mannella’s commands and was standing to the side of the car, not in the vehicle’s path. The court noted testimony and unrebutted forensic analysis. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the denial of qualified immunity to Mannella.

8-3

Kailin v. Village of Gurnee
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
August 8, 2023

The Kailins called the Gurnee Police Department to report that their daughter had been the victim of possible criminal conduct. Officer Greer arrived at their house around 8 p.m. to follow up. Six seconds after Kailin opened the door, Greer shot the Kailins’ dog, Timber, on their neighbor’s lawn. The Kailins sued, asserting illegal seizure, 42 U.S.C. 1983 against Officer Greer, a “Monell” claim of municipal liability, and a claim for indemnification by the Village. The district court granted the defendants summary judgment. The court noted the Kailins’ assertions, “that Timber never barked nor growled at Greer” and that Timber was "simply playing” but concluded that the video from the body-worn camera controlled and eliminated any dispute of fact.

The Seventh Circuit reversed. The question of what Timber was doing and how she was behaving is key to determining the reasonableness of Greer’s actions and therefore to liability on all claims. This is not the rare case where the video definitively demonstrates what occurred. There is no audio to reveal whether Timber was growling or barking as Greer alleged. The entire video lasts only six seconds; it is disputable whether the dog can be seen at any time in the video until she has been shot.

9-4

Brandee Buschmann v. Kansas City Police Department
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
August 10, 2023

Two dog owners sued a police officer and the Kansas City Board of Police Commissioners after the officer shot a dog during an encounter at a residence. The dog owners alleged that the officer violated their rights under the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments by unreasonably “seizing” the dog. They also asserted that the Board’s policies and customs caused the officer to commit the alleged violation. The district court granted summary judgment for the officer and the Board.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that given the behavior of the dog, and the failure of the owner to control the animal at the doorway, a reasonable officer could have perceived the dog as an imminent threat. Thus, the officer’s s firing of a first shot was reasonable. The court further wrote that the circumstances in LeMay are readily distinguishable from the officer’s doorway encounter with a growling dog who suddenly rushed at him and then turned in the direction of his fellow officer.

3-2, 8-1

Estate of De'Angelo Brown v. E.C. West
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
August 10, 2023

Plaintiff was a passenger in a car that led West Memphis Police Department (WMPD) officers on a dangerous chase. He was shot and killed when officers tried to stop the car, and his estate sued them under 42 U.S.C. Section 1983 for excessive force and state-created danger. The district court granted summary judgment to the officers.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court explained that it is undisputed that Plaintiff had his hands up. And the court has no doubt that shooting into the car posed a substantial risk of serious bodily harm to him. But the driver had just led police on a reckless, high-speed chase, which involved swerving into oncoming traffic, hitting a police car, and resisting efforts to stop the car by other means. By the time officers started shooting, the car had run over one officer’s legs and was headed toward others. Here, the court wrote that all things considered, officers acted reasonably in using deadly force, and the district court didn’t err in granting summary judgment.

8-3

United States v. Joshua Duggar
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
August 7, 2023

Defendant challenged his conviction for receiving child pornography, arguing his incriminating statements made during the search at the car dealership should have been suppressed on the ground that the agents violated his right to counsel, which he tried to invoke by mentioning a lawyer and then attempting to call one. The court explained that a reasonable person in Defendant's position would not have thought “his freedom of movement” was “restricted” such as to constitute arrest-like custody triggering the right to counsel. 

7-3

United States v. Canada
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
August 8, 2023

Wichita Police were conducting a proactive patrol in a high-crime area. After officers pulled over the defendant, John Canada, for failing to engage his turn signal, one officer saw Defendant “strenuously arching his hips, reaching his right arm under the rear of his seat. Officers also believed Defendant delayed bringing his vehicle to a stop, which caused them concern. Defendant claimed the officers lacked reasonable suspicion to engage in a protective sweep. To this, the Tenth Circuit disagreed: the officers here could not have been sure that Defendant was dangerous or had a weapon present. But the furtive movement and slow roll provided enough for the officers to reasonably suspect that Defendant was both dangerous and had access to a weapon.”

5-4
