---
source: "52 29 DEC 2023.docx"
tags:
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Government-&-Administrative-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Criminal-Law
  - Animal-/-Dog-Law
  - Business-Law
  - Civil-Procedure
  - Civil-Rights
  - Civil-Rights
  - Criminal-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Government-&-Administrative-Law
---

CASES 29 DEC 2023

US v. Perez

Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit

Docket: 22-1121

Opinion Date: December 28, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The case concerns the appeal of Gilbert Perez, who sought to have his federal drug conviction overturned on the basis that the United States District Court for the District of Maine had incorrectly denied his motion to suppress the outcomes of a warrantless search of his backpack. Perez argued that the search was not justified under the search-incident-to-arrest exception to the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The District Court, relying on a previous case (United States v. Eatherton), had upheld the search. Perez contended that subsequent Supreme Court decisions had undermined the validity of Eatherton.

On the night of his arrest, Perez had been seen acting suspiciously in a McDonald’s parking lot in Lawrence, Massachusetts. When he left the lot, carrying a backpack, he was monitored by state troopers. He was seen exiting a taxi, and large quantities of cash were found in the vehicle, arousing suspicion that he had been involved in a drug transaction. When Perez returned to the McDonald’s lot, he was approached by Trooper Jason Conant, who identified himself as a state trooper. Perez ran but was caught, and the backpack was removed from him and searched. The search revealed it contained fentanyl and cocaine. Perez was subsequently indicted on a federal drug-related charge.

In his appeal, Perez maintained that the backpack's search was a violation of the Fourth Amendment. The United States Court of Appeals for the First Circuit disagreed, affirming the judgment of conviction. It concluded that neither of the Supreme Court cases cited by Perez had invalidated the Eatherton ruling. The panel also rejected the notion that Perez's backpack could be considered separate from his person at the time of arrest. As such, it fell within the search-incident-to-arrest exception to the Fourth Amendment's warrant requirement.

Tag 5-26

Peterson v. Heinen

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-1603

Opinion Date: December 26, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Government & Administrative Law

The case involves Brandon Peterson, an inmate at Washington County Jail (WCJ), who filed a lawsuit alleging violations of his constitutional rights by various jail officials. The United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, reviewing the case, had to decide on numerous instances of alleged excessive force, failure to intervene, and deliberate indifference to serious medical needs, as well as constitutional and state law claims.

The court found that on several occasions of alleged excessive force, the officers' actions were justified given Peterson's disruptive and threatening behavior. Consequently, the court granted qualified immunity to the officers involved in these incidents. In the case of the failure to intervene claims, the court decided that without an underlying constitutional violation, there can be no liability for failure to intervene, resulting in the officers being granted qualified immunity for these claims as well.

On the issue of deliberate indifference to Peterson's mental health condition, the court found that the prison officials had made efforts to address his condition and had not acted with deliberate disregard for his health. Therefore, the court reversed the district court's denial of qualified immunity to the officials involved.

Regarding Peterson's claim of being subjected to unconstitutional conditions of confinement, the court remanded the case to the district court for it to address this issue. The court also remanded the case to the district court to decide on the state law and Monell claims. As such, the Appeals Court reversed in part, dismissed in part, and vacated in part the district court's decision, remanding the case for further proceedings consistent with the court’s opinion.

P. v. Ramirez

Court: California Courts of Appeal

Docket: H049957(Sixth Appellate District)

Opinion Date: December 22, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

In the case being reviewed, Alfredo Ramirez was found guilty of multiple counts of sexual offenses against minors and was sentenced to 107 years in prison. Ramirez appealed, arguing that the evidence obtained from his phone, which was unlocked using his fingerprint, was obtained unlawfully and violated his Fourth, Fifth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights. He also argued that the trial court erred in admitting expert testimony concerning child sexual abuse victims’ responses, incorrectly instructed the jury, and imposed fines without determining his ability to pay.

The Court of Appeal of the State of California, Sixth Appellate District, disagreed with Ramirez and affirmed the judgment. The court held that using Ramirez's fingerprint to unlock his phone did not constitute an unreasonable search under the Fourth Amendment or violate his Fifth Amendment right against compulsory self-incrimination. The court also found no violation of Ramirez's due process rights. Furthermore, the court determined that the trial court did not err in its instructions to the jury or in admitting the expert testimony. Finally, the court found that Ramirez had forfeited his right to challenge the imposed fines and fees due to his failure to object at sentencing.

USA v. Brumfield

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 22-30238

Opinion Date: December 22, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Criminal Law

In an appeal before the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, two defendants, Robert Brumfield and Jeremy Esteves, convicted for their roles in a 2013 armed truck robbery in New Orleans, challenged the district court's denial of their motion for a new trial. This motion was based on their claim that the Government had suppressed evidence related to the credibility of two witnesses, which they argued violated the rules established in Brady v. Maryland and Giglio v. United States. In addition, Brumfield separately claimed that the Government failed to correct false testimony and also appealed his sentence.

The Court found that the new evidence was not material in Brumfield's case, his claim of false testimony was without merit, and his sentence was both procedurally and substantively reasonable. However, the Court concluded that the new evidence was material to Esteves, and thus his Brady claim required further consideration by the district court. Consequently, the Court affirmed in part, reversed in part, and remanded the case to the district court for further consideration of Esteves’s Brady claim.

Bloodworth v. Kansas City Board of Police Commissioners

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-3540

Opinion Date: December 22, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Animal / Dog Law, Business Law, Civil Procedure, Civil Rights

The case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit involved Allen Thomas Bloodworth, II, a business owner who operated two towing businesses in Kansas City. Bloodworth alleged that the Kansas City Board of Police Commissioners and fourteen officers of the Kansas City Police Department conspired to stop him from running his businesses and shut down his ability to conduct business in Kansas City. He brought 17 state and federal claims, including defamation, tortious interference with contract and business expectancy, intentional infliction of emotional distress, and negligent hiring, training, supervision, or retention. He also alleged Fourth Amendment violations for an unlawful warrant search and seizure of his residence and business, the shooting of his dog during the search, and the seizure of business records.

The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants. On appeal, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the ruling. The appellate court concluded that Bloodworth failed to link the specific conduct of individual defendants to the alleged constitutional violations, and his claims were based on general assertions mostly. It also ruled that Bloodworth failed to establish that the defendants' conduct was extreme and outrageous to support his claim for intentional infliction of emotional distress. The court further found that Bloodworth failed to establish a constitutional violation resulting from the official policy, unlawful practice, custom, or failure to properly train, retain, supervise, or discipline the police officers. Therefore, there was no basis for municipal liability against the Kansas City Board of Police Commissioners.

Alexander v. The State of Wyoming

Court: Wyoming Supreme Court

Citation: 2023 WY 127

Opinion Date: December 28, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Criminal Law

In a case before the Supreme Court of the State of Wyoming, appellant Darrell Leonardo Alexander claimed that the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence obtained by law enforcement after they entered his apartment without a warrant or his consent. The case revolved around the question of warrantless entry and consent.

The court held that the warrantless entry into Alexander's apartment did not violate the Fourth Amendment. This was because the officers reasonably believed that Alexander's girlfriend, identified as E.B., had the apparent authority to consent to their entry. E.B. had called the police to report domestic violence, and when the officers arrived, she opened the door to the apartment and stepped inside, holding the door open for the officers. This action was seen as an invitation for the officers to enter the apartment.

The court also found that E.B. had given implied consent for the officers to enter the apartment based on her nonverbal gestures and actions, such as opening the door and stepping inside when asked about the location of her boyfriend. Considering the totality of the circumstances, the court ruled that the officers' reliance on E.B.'s apparent authority to consent to their entry was reasonable. As such, the district court's decision to deny Alexander's motion to suppress the evidence was affirmed.

United States v. Maxwell

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-2655

Opinion Date: December 27, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Criminal Law

In the case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, defendants Antione Deandre Maxwell and Chavee E’Laun Harden were convicted of conspiracy to interfere with commerce by robbery. Maxwell was additionally convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm. The defendants challenged the sufficiency of the evidence supporting their convictions, and Harden additionally argued that the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence, in denying his request for an implicit bias instruction, and in calculating his sentencing range under the U.S. Sentencing Guidelines.

The court affirmed the convictions due to overwhelming evidence of the defendants' involvement in the robbery, including their presence at the scene of the crime, their possession of stolen goods and firearms, and their actions before and after the robbery. The court also held that the district court correctly denied Harden's motion to suppress evidence, finding that the officers' entry into his home without a warrant was justified due to the exigent circumstances surrounding the presence of unattended children and the likely presence of an armed robbery suspect. The court also rejected Harden's request for an implicit bias instruction, stating that it was within the district court's discretion to decide how best to address the risk of racial bias. Finally, the court found no error in the district court’s calculation of Harden’s sentencing range, considering his role in the robbery, his perjury during trial, and his attempts to influence a witness to lie for him.

State v. Pickell

Court: Supreme Court of Hawaii

Docket: SCWC-21-0000530

Opinion Date: December 26, 2023

> **Areas of Law:** Criminal Law, Government & Administrative Law

The Supreme Court of the State of Hawai'i affirmed the judgment of the Intermediate Court of Appeals upholding the conviction of Michael Pickell for operating a vehicle under the influence of an intoxicant. The case centered around the legality of a traffic stop initiated by a Maui County police officer who observed Pickell executing a U-turn at a highway intersection with left turn only markings and signage but no signage explicitly prohibiting U-turns. Pickell argued that in the absence of an express sign prohibiting U-turns, as required by Hawai'i Revised Statutes (HRS) § 291C-82(c), the officer lacked reasonable suspicion to make the traffic stop. The court held that the Maui County ordinance, which requires drivers to follow the directional movements exhibited on markings and signage at intersections, was neither preempted by HRS § 291C-82(c) nor in conflict with it. Therefore, the officer had reasonable suspicion to initiate the traffic stop based on a violation of the Maui County ordinance, and the motion to suppress evidence from the stop was properly denied.
