---
source: "CASE 11MAR2022.docx"
tags:
  - Deliberate-Indifference
  - Pretrial-Detainee.-Medical-Care
  - Parole-Searches
  - Probation-Searches
  - Qualified-Immunity
  - Use-of-Force
  - Deadly-Force
  - First-Amendment
  - Retaliation
  - Arrest
  - Seizure-of-a-Person
---

CASE 11MAR2022

**Hyman v. Lewis**
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: March 8, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** Deliberate Indifference, Pretrial Detainee. Medical Care

At the Detroit Detention Center, officers searched Lipford and did not find any contraband. Lipford denied being under the influence of drugs or carrying any medication. At 9:48 p.m., officers placed Lipford in a glass-walled room used to hold multiple detainees awaiting arraignment. Lipford nodded off. He slid to the floor at 11:02 p.m. Lipford laid on the floor motionless until 2:50 a.m. when he was found unresponsive. He was pronounced dead at 3:50 a.m. Hospital staff found cocaine, heroin, and fentanyl, concealed in Lipford’s rectum. The jail’s operating procedures required that officers conduct rounds every 30 minutes; “physically open the cell doors" and ensure that detainees are actually there; and check "that every detainee is living and breathing.” Although Officer Lewis ostensibly made his rounds that night, he did not physically enter the video-arraignment room nor speak with the detainees. Avoiding interaction with detainees was apparently common because detainees would become agitated at officers waking them up.

The district court dismissed claims by Lipford’s estate against several defendants. The Sixth Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of Lewis. The estate did not establish that a reasonable officer in Lewis’s position would have known that Lipford was potentially concealing drugs, subjecting himself to an excessive risk of harm, and that Lewis’s ignoring this risk was objectively reckless. Failure to follow internal policies does not, alone, equal deliberate indifference.

From the Case:

Following our recent decision in Brawner v. Scott County, a plaintiff must show “(1) that [the detainee] had an objectively serious medical need; and (2) that [the defendant’s] action (or lack of action) was intentional (not accidental) and [that] she . . . recklessly failed to act reasonably to mitigate the risk the serious medical need posed to [the detainee], even though a reasonable official in [the defendant’s] position would have known” of that risk. 14 F.4th 585, 597 (6th Cir. 2021). While Brawner is far from clear, we can distill a couple of principles from it. First, Brawner left the “objectively serious medical need” prong untouched. See id. at 591, 597. Second, under the modified second prong, we know that Hyman must prove “more than negligence but less than subjective intent—something akin to reckless disregard.” Id. at 596 (citation omitted). And third, we know that the modified second prong asks whether the defendant acted “‘recklessly in the face of an unjustifiably high risk’ that is either ‘known or so obvious that it should be known’” to a reasonable official in the defendant’s position. Britt ex rel. Britt v. Hamilton County, No. 21-3424, 2022 WL 405847, at *2 (6th Cir. Feb. 10, 2022) (quoting Brawner, 14 F.4th at 596–97); see also Greene, 22 F.4th at 607.
With those principles in mind, Hyman needed to show that a reasonable officer in Lewis’s position would have known that Lipford was potentially concealing drugs, subjecting himself to an excessive risk of harm, and that Lewis’s ignoring this risk was objectively reckless. She has not met this burden. First, there is no evidence that a reasonable officer in Lewis’s position would have been aware of Lipford’s needs. For one, Lipford never suggested to jail staff that he had narcotics in his possession. And no staff member observed Lipford manifesting an overdose while he was at the jail. Further, there were at least three other detainees present in the room when Lipford was discovered, none of whom signaled any concern that there might be something wrong with him. On these facts, we cannot say that a reasonable officer would have had reason to know of Lipford’s needs.

Second, Lewis’s actions that night were not reckless. Hyman has pointed to no evidence that Lewis intentionally ignored Lipford’s needs. She repeatedly notes that Lewis “intentionally” did not check on Lipford every 30 minutes. That is insufficient. Lewis’s admitted intentional violation of jail operating procedures does not mean he intentionally ignored Lipford’s needs. Hyman also argues that “Recklessnes [sic] equals gross negligence” under Michigan law. She cites Mich. Comp. Law § 691.1407(8)(a): “‘Gross negligence’ means conduct so reckless as to demonstrate a substantial lack of concern for whether an injury results.” But this is inapt. On the facts before us, Lewis was at most negligent, not grossly negligent or reckless. His failure to open the doors to the video-arraignment room to check on detainees individually violated operating procedures. When asked why he did not physically enter the arraignment room, Lewis provided several reasons, chief among them that officers did not want to irritate inmates by repeatedly waking them up while they were sleeping. While Lewis’s actions might have been imprudent, they do not show that Lewis was acting “in the face of an unjustifiably high risk” that any reasonable officer would have known. Lewis made his rounds, looking into the video-arraignment room and monitoring the inmates inside. He had no reason to know that Lipford had concealed narcotics in his body.
Lewis no doubt violated the jail’s operating procedures. But “failure to follow internal policies, without more,” does not equal deliberate indifference.

Hyman has not shown that any reasonable officer in Lewis’s position would have known that Lipford’s undisclosed, concealed drugs created an “obvious” and unjustifiably high risk of harm.

**United States v. Price**
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Opinion Date: March 9, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** Parole Searches, Probation Searches

Price shot and killed a man for which he was convicted of felony aggravated battery. After being convicted of a felony, Price attempted to purchase a firearm. A gunshop clerk ran a background check after Price placed an order and discovered he was a “prohibited person” under 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1). The clerk then contacted ATF Special Agent Clancy, and gave Price an inoperable magazine shell. Price purchased ammunition. Price later complained the magazine did not fit “his firearm.” SA Clancy impersonated a store employee for Price’s return and contacted the Indiana Department of Correction. Parole officers arrived at the store and searched Price's vehicle, as authorized by his parole agreement. Inside the vehicle they found a stolen pistol that was loaded. Special Agent Clancy and the parole officers drove Price to his residence. The officers searched, discovered ammunition, and notified SA Clancy. SA Clancy obtained and executed a search warrant for the home, a van parked in the driveway, and an outbuilding. Officers found a firearm and ammunition. A rifle was found in the van.

Indicted for possessing a firearm as a felon, 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1), Price unsuccessfully moved to suppress the evidence, arguing the warrantless parole searches violated the Fourth Amendment because the parole officers acted as a “stalking horse” for the ATF, allowing Special Agent Clancy to circumvent typical warrant and probable cause requirements. The Seventh Circuit affirmed holding that the parole officers complied with the parole agreement; they had reasonable cause to believe Price had violated his parole conditions. The court also rejected arguments that there was insufficient evidence that Price had constructively possessed the guns and challenges to sentencing enhancements for multiple firearms, a stolen firearm, and obstruction of justice.

From the Case:

Motions to Suppress and Trial. Before trial, Price moved to suppress the evidence obtained from the searches of the Ford Escape, the Oldsmobile van, and his residence. Price argued the warrantless parole searches violated the Fourth Amend-ment because the parole officers acted as a “stalking horse” on behalf of the ATF, allowing Clancy to circumvent typical warrant and probable cause requirements. The government
6 No. 20-3191
defended the search on multiple grounds. The stalking horse theory was obsolete, the government argued, and the search by the parole officers complied with the parole agreement be-cause they had reasonable cause to believe Price had violated his parole conditions. Even if the stalking horse theory was valid, the government submitted it did not apply here because the parole officers followed standard procedures by conduct-ing a search after receiving information giving rise to reason-able suspicion that Price had violated the terms of his parole. And regardless of the validity of the stalking horse theory, the government invoked the inevitable discovery doctrine be-cause Clancy had probable cause and could have obtained a search warrant at the time he arrested Price, as well as because the Ford Escape would have been subject to an inventory search after Price’s arrest.
The district court denied Price’s motion to suppress and his request for an evidentiary hearing. After considering several Supreme Court precedents—including Griffin v. Wisconsin, 483 U.S. 868 (1987), United States v. Knights, 534 U.S. 112 (2001), and Samson v. California, 547 U.S. 843 (2006)—the court concluded that “the stalking horse theory has no application” to Price’s case. Instead, the court framed the inquiry as “whether the Parole Officers’ search of Mr. Price’s vehicle and residence were reasonable under the circumstances.” After weighing Price’s diminished privacy expectations as a parolee against the government’s heightened interest in supervising parolees, the court was satisfied that no Fourth Amendment violation took place.

“[T]he ultimate touchstone of the Fourth Amendment is ‘reasonableness.’” Riley v. California, 573 U.S. 373, 381 (2014) (quoting Brigham City v. Stuart, 547 U.S. 398, 403 (2006)). “[T]he reasonableness of a search is determined ‘by assessing, on the one hand, the degree to which it intrudes upon an in-dividual’s privacy and, on the other, the degree to which it is needed for the promotion of legitimate governmental inter-ests.’” Knights, 534 U.S. at 118–19 (quoting Wyoming v. Hough-ton, 526 U.S. 295, 300 (1999)). A defendant’s status as either a probationer or parolee “informs both sides of that balance.” Id. at 119; see Samson, 547 U.S. at 850–57 (applying the Knights framework to parolees).
Two decisions guide our view of this balance of interests. In Knights, the Court examined the constitutionality of a war-rantless search by law enforcement of a probationer’s apartment. 534 U.S. at 114. The Court assessed the privacy in-terests of the probationer, noting that “[p]robation is ‘one point … on a continuum of possible punishments ranging from solitary confinement in a maximum-security facility to a few hours of mandatory community service.’” Id. at 119 (quot-ing Griffin, 483 U.S. at 874). As a result, “probationers ‘do not enjoy the absolute liberty to which every citizen is entitled.’” Id. (quoting Griffin, 483 U.S. at 874). Additionally, the Court emphasized that the probationer was aware of the conditions in his probation agreement that authorized searches with or without a warrant or “reasonable cause,” which “significantly diminished [the probationer’s] reasonable expectation of pri-vacy.” Id. at 114, 120. In contrast, the Court in Knights stressed the government’s legitimate interest in apprehending law-breakers, noting the increased propensity of probationers to commit criminal activities and destroy incriminating evi-dence. Id. at 120. Accordingly, the Court held in Knights that “the balance of these considerations requires no more than reasonable suspicion to conduct a search of [the] proba-tioner’s house.” Id. at 121. “The same circumstances … render a warrant requirement unnecessary.” Id.

Here, as in Knights and Samson, Price’s status as a parolee reduced his privacy expectations and informed the govern-ment’s legitimate interests. As a parolee his privacy expecta-tions were diminished below even those of a probationer, since “parole is more akin to imprisonment than probation.” Samson, 547 U.S. at 850. Price’s parole agreement also in-cluded a provision that permitted parole officers to conduct a search based on “reasonable cause” rather than the Fourth Amendment’s “probable cause” standard. At the same time, Price’s status as a parolee gave the state an “overwhelming interest” in supervising him. This is especially true where, as here, parole officers had reason to believe that Price pur-chased .40 caliber ammunition and a rifle magazine, traveled to Indy Trading Post to use the shooting range, and was ar-rested by Clancy.

In sum, Price’s status as a parolee and the terms of his pa-role agreement lessened his privacy expectations while bol-stering the government’s legitimate interests in conducting a search. The terms of Price’s parole agreement were not breached—either by parole officers, who had “reasonable cause” to believe Price was in violation of parole, or by Clancy, whose searches were authorized by search warrants independent of the parole agreement. Under Knights and Samson, the searches of Price’s property and residence did not offend the Fourth Amendment.
**United States v. Mattox**
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: March 4, 2022

Tags: 

On September 22, 2018, police officers responded to a 911 call about gunshots at an apartment complex in St. Paul, Minnesota. The officers followed a fresh blood trail and found a loaded Desert Eagle .50-caliber semi-automatic pistol with blood on it and the hammer cocked back in the firing position. The officers learned that a man had been shot in his face and right foot and had been taken to the hospital.
An officer went to the emergency room at the hospital and entered the man’s room. The man’s bloody clothes were on the floor, and at the officer’s request, a nurse took the identification from the clothes. The identification showed the defendant’s name, Marcus Mattox. The officer took the clothes, and the next day, an officer went to the hospital and executed a warrant for a DNA swab from Mattox and asked him some questions for a few minutes. Mattox admitted that he was at the scene of the crime and stated that he did not know who shot him. He declined to answer more questions. The police compared Mattox’s DNA sample to gun swabs that tested positive for blood. The swabs matched Mattox’s DNA sample. The police also obtained video surveillance footage of the shooting. The video shows Mattox exit the apartment building, approach a male and a female at the back of an SUV in the parking lot, appear to draw a firearm, and take a shooting stance. After Mattox drew his gun, the male appeared to shoot at Mattox.

A federal grand jury indicted Mattox on one count of possessing a firearm as a convicted felon. See 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Mattox moved to suppress the evidence seized from his hospital room and the statements he made to the police while hospitalized. The district court denied the motions, adopting the magistrate judge’s conclusions that (1) the plain-view exception to the warrant requirement applied to the seizure of Mattox’s clothes, and (2) the questioning of Mattox was not a custodial interrogation and his statements were voluntary.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed defendant's conviction for possessing a firearm as a convicted felon and the district court's denial of his motion to suppress. In regard to the suppression motions, the court concluded that defendant did not have an objectively reasonable expectation of privacy in his hospital room and thus the officer did not violate his Fourth Amendment rights by entering the room. Because the officer lawfully entered his hospital room and his clothes were in plain view, the court concluded that defendant's Fourth Amendment rights were not violated. The court also concluded that defendant's statements to the police were voluntary in light of the totality of the circumstances where law enforcement did not overbear defendant's will.

From the Case:

The Fourth Amendment permits an officer to seize an object without a warrant under the plain-view doctrine if “(1) the officer did not violate the Fourth Amendment in arriving at the place from which the evidence could be plainly viewed, (2) the object’s incriminating character is immediately apparent, and (3) the officer has a lawful right of access to the object itself.” United States v. Vinson, 805 F.3d 1150, 1152 (8th Cir. 2015). Mattox does not dispute that the second and third conditions are met here. But he argues that the first condition is not met because the police violated his Fourth Amendment rights by entering his hospital room.

We disagree. Whether the police violated Mattox’s Fourth Amendment rights by entering the hospital room depends on whether Mattox had an objectively reasonable expectation of privacy in the hospital room. See United States v. Long, 797 F.3d 558, 564 (8th Cir. 2015). Our determination of whether an individual had a reasonable expectation of privacy may be informed by state law. See, e.g., Rambo, 789 F.2d at 1295-96. True, as Mattox points out, overnight guests in homes and hotel rooms have a reasonable expectation of privacy. Minnesota v. Olson, 495 U.S. 91, 96-97 (1990); United States v. Conner, 127 F.3d 663, 666 (8th Cir. 1997). But that is because hosting overnight guests in homes “is a longstanding social custom that serves functions recognized as valuable by society.” Olson, 495 U.S. at 98. Being admitted to the hospital for a gunshot wound does not serve the same valuable societal function. Furthermore, unlike in hotel rooms and residential guest rooms, in a hospital room, people are constantly coming and going from the room to provide medical services. We conclude that Mattox did not have an objectively reasonable expectation of privacy in his hospital room and thus the officer did not violate his Fourth Amendment rights by entering the room. Because the officer lawfully entered his hospital room and his clothes were in plain view, Mattox’s Fourth Amendment rights were not violated.

Next, we consider whether Mattox’s statements to the police while in the hospital were voluntary. Mattox does not argue that a custodial interrogation occurred. A statement made outside of a custodial interrogation may be suppressed if it is not made voluntarily. See United States v. Brave Heart, 397 F.3d 1035, 1040 (8th Cir. 2005). “A statement is involuntary when it was extracted by threats, violence, or express or implied promises sufficient to overbear the defendant’s will and critically impair his capacity for self-determination.” Vega, 676 F.3d at 718. “We determine if a defendant’s will has been overborne by examining the totality of the circumstances, including both the conduct of law enforcement in exerting pressure to confess on the defendant and the defendant’s ability to resist that pressure.”

Mattox argues that the statements were involuntary because he was in the hospital recovering from gunshot wounds, he had taken pain medication, the police executed a warrant to obtain a DNA sample, and he was not read Miranda rights. We disagree. The totality of the circumstances shows that law enforcement did not overbear Mattox’s will. See Brave Heart, 397 F.3d at 1040. Being on pain medication does not show that a defendant’s will has been overborne if there is evidence that the patient answered “reasonably” and understood what was occurring. See United States v. Annis, 446 F.3d 852, 856 (8th Cir. 2006). The court noted that the officer testified “that Mattox answered questions in an appropriate context and manner; Mattox spoke in a normal cadence and pace; Mattox did not slur his words; and that [the officer] was able to totally understand Mattox’s answers.” Mattox also refused to answer some of the officer’s questions, which suggests that the pain medication did not impair his ability to resist police pressure. See Brave Heart, 397 F.3d at 1040. The court also found “that there is nothing in the present record to indicate that [the police officers] employed any strong-arm tactics, deceptive strategems or other coercive acts . . . and made no threats or promises while talking to Mattox.” The interview lasted only a few minutes and Miranda warnings were not required because Mattox was not in custody. See United States v. New, 491 F.3d 369, 374 (8th Cir. 2007). After considering the totality of the circumstances, we conclude that Mattox’s statements were voluntary.
Williams v. City of Burlington
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: March 9, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** Qualified Immunity, Use of Force, Deadly Force

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity to a police officer in an action brought by Marquis Jones's estate, alleging claims under state and federal law after a police officer shot and killed Jones while he was running away from a traffic stop. In this case, the court agreed with the district court that there are two genuine disputes of material fact for the jury: first, whether the officer saw Jones drop the gun when he ordered him to; and second, whether the officer was unreasonable in believing Jones was taking a firing position rather than surrendering. The court stated that, if, construing the evidence most favorably to the estate, the officer knew Jones was unarmed, then shooting him violated a clearly established constitutional right.

Ballentine v. Tucker
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
Opinion Date: March 8, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** First Amendment, Retaliation, Arrest

Plaintiffs filed suit alleging claims under 42 U.S.C. 1983 and Nevada law against individual law enforcement officers and the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department. Plaintiffs' claims stemmed from their arrest for chalking anti-police messages on sidewalks. On appeal, plaintiffs challenge the district court's grant of qualified immunity to Detective Tucker.

The panel affirmed the district court's holding that a reasonable factfinder could conclude from the evidence that Detective Tucker violated plaintiffs' First Amendment rights. The panel reversed the district court's holding that Detective Tucker is entitled to qualified immunity because it was clearly established at the time of plaintiffs' arrests that an arrest supported by probable cause but made in retaliation for protected speech violates the First Amendment. The panel stated that plaintiffs have shown differential treatment of similarly situated individuals, satisfying the Nieves exception. In this case, the district court correctly concluded that a reasonable jury could find that the anti-police content of plaintiffs' chalkings was a substantial or motivating factor for Detective Tucker's declarations of arrest. Therefore, a reasonable factfinder could conclude that Detective Tucker violated plaintiffs' First Amendment rights. Furthermore, a reasonable officer in Detective Tucker's position had fair notice that the First Amendment prohibited arresting plaintiffs for the content of their speech, notwithstanding probable cause.

The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the district court’s summary judgment, on qualified immunity grounds, for Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department Detective Christopher Tucker in an action brought pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 alleging, in part, that Tucker violated plaintiffs’ First Amendment rights when he arrested them in retaliation for their chalking anti-police messages on sidewalks.
The panel held that Detective Tucker was not entitled to qualified immunity because it was clearly established at the time of plaintiffs’ arrests that an arrest supported by probable cause but made in retaliation for protected speech violates the First Amendment.
Citing Nieves v. Bartlett, 139 S. Ct. 1715 (2019), the panel first recognized that plaintiffs bringing First Amendment retaliatory arrest claims must generally plead and prove the absence of probable cause because the presence of probable cause generally speaks to the objective reasonableness of an arrest and suggests that the officer’s animus is not what caused the arrest. However, the Supreme Court has also carved out a narrow exception for cases where officers have probable cause to make arrests, but typically exercise their discretion not to do so.
Here, plaintiffs presented objective evidence showing that they were arrested while others who chalked and did not engage in anti-police speech were not arrested. Given that plaintiffs had shown differential treatment of similarly situated individuals, the district court correctly concluded that a reasonable jury could find that the anti-police content of plaintiffs’ chalkings was a substantial or motivating factor for Detective Tucker’s declarations of arrest. Accordingly, the panel agreed with the district court that a reasonable factfinder could conclude from the evidence that Detective Tucker violated plaintiffs’ First Amendment rights.
The panel held that at the time of Detective Tucker’s conduct in July 2013, binding Ninth Circuit precedent gave fair notice that it would be unlawful to arrest plaintiffs in retaliation for their First Amendment activity, notwithstanding the existence of probable cause. A reasonable officer in Detective Tucker’s position had fair notice that the First Amendment prohibited arresting plaintiffs. Accordingly, the district court erred in granting qualified immunity to Detective Tucker.

Colorado v. Brown
Court: Colorado Supreme Court
Opinion Date: March 7, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** Seizure of a Person

The State of Colorado filed an interlocutory appeal to challenge a Denver District Court order suppressing defendant Alexander Brown's statements following his detention by police. The trial court determined that the officers who detained Brown did not have a reasonable and articulable suspicion that a crime had been committed, was being committed, or was about to be committed. After its review, the Colorado Supreme Court concluded that while the trial court erred in considering the officers’ subjective intent in effectuating the seizure, it was nonetheless correct that the officers lacked reasonable and articulable suspicion to detain Brown. Accordingly, the Supreme Court affirmed the trial court’s order suppressing Brown’s statements, albeit on other grounds.

Seizure of people in vehicle was not supported by reasonable suspicion and therefore subsequent evidence and statements were suppressed. (Images in case!)
