---
source: "46 BF 12NOV2021.docx"
tags:
  - Consensual-Encounter
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - Search-Incident-to-Arrest-(Second-Gant-Exception).
---

**46 BF 12NOV2021**

United States v. Coleman
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 9, 2021
Tags:

As students were arriving at Patrick Henry High School in Washington County, Virgnia in September of 2017, an administrator reported an unknown man (Coleman, age 39) was erratically parked on the campus and was “asleep or passed out” in his vehicle with a crossbow visible in the backseat. The vehicle was stopped but running and was mostly parked in a travel lane with the brake lights on. The deputy believed possession of the crossbow was illegal under Virginia law because it could fire “a projected missile on the school campus.” As the deputy pulled behind the vehicle and started to exit his patrol car, Coleman began to drive away. The deputy then turned on his lights and Coleman stopped. As the deputy approached the car, he saw the butt of a crossbow in the backseat and noted Coleman was lethargic. The deputy asked Coleman if he had any weapons in the vehicle, to which Coleman responded that he had a firearm in the vehicle’s center console. Johnson asked Coleman to exit the vehicle. When Coleman did so, the deputy observed “a fairly large bag of a green leafy substance that appeared to be marijuana” beside the driver’s seat. Another deputy searched the vehicle, finding marijuana, crystal methamphetamine, baggies, a scale, a .38 Special revolver, and the crossbow. 

Coleman was among 28 defendants indicted for participating in a drug trafficking organization. Coleman was charged in two drug counts and for using and carrying a firearm during and in relation to a drug trafficking crime. Coleman unsuccessfully moved to suppress the evidence, arguing that the deputy did not have reasonable suspicion of criminal activity to conduct an investigative “Terry” stop because possession of a crossbow on school grounds is not illegal in Virginia. The court held that even if Coleman had not possessed the crossbow, the deputy would have had reasonable suspicion to conduct an investigative stop because a reasonable officer could conclude based on the totality of the circumstances that Coleman was engaged in various unlawful activities, namely, trespassing on school grounds, commission of a parking violation, and unlawfully operating a vehicle under the influence. Citing the Supreme Court decision in* Vernonia Sch. Dist.** **47J v. Acton*, 515 U.S. 646, 656 (1995) the court noted that “Fourth Amendment rights . . . are different in public schools than elsewhere; the ‘reasonableness’ inquiry cannot disregard the schools’ custodial and tutelary responsibility for children.” The Fourth Circuit affirmed his convictions and 211-month sentence.

 

United States v. Campbell-Martin
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 8, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Consensual Encounter, Reasonable Suspicion, Search Incident to Arrest (Second Gant Exception).

In May 2018 at 10:27 p.m., Officer Nicole Hotz was patrolling a school parking lot. She asked people to leave because suspicious activity had been occurring there overnight. At that time, Officer Hotz noticed a vehicle pull into the lot. She pulled up near the vehicle and parked two spots away from it so that she could ask the occupants to leave. Christin Campbell-Martin was sitting in the driver’s seat and seemed to be hiding her face with her hands. Officer Hotz shined a spotlight on the driver’s side window to get the woman’s attention and then walked up to the window. The woman rolled down the window and Officer Hotz noticed that “she was very nervous and fidgety”; “her speech was quick”; and “her pupils were constricted,” which Officer Hotz thought was unusual in the dark. Officer Hotz also noticed that the woman “kept pulling her knees to her chest and breathing really heavy.” Officer Hotz thought that the woman might be under the influence of drugs. Officer Hotz also thought it was strange that the two male passengers were very quiet and did not look toward her.

When Officer Hotz requested everyone’s identification, the woman in the driver’s seat and the man in the front passenger seat stated that their names were “Shannon Mckelvy” and “Favian Estrada” but denied having identification. Officer Hotz then asked, “What’s going on? Run me through. Something’s going on right now.” The woman said that the two passengers picked her up because her boyfriend was “beating the crap out of” her, causing Officer Hotz to ask her if she was okay. When asked, neither person knew the last four digits of their social-security number, which Officer Hotz thought was strange. Officer Hotz ran “Estrada’s” name and discovered that it was false and that his real name was Adam Leiva, so she arrested him for providing false identification information under Iowa law.

Sergeant Richard Holland arrived to assist Officer Hotz and asked the driver if a purse in the back seat belonged to her. She said it did not and refused to give Sergeant Holland permission to search it. Because the man in the back seat said he was the one who had been lent the car, Officer Hotz asked him to look for identification in the purse. When he found “Mckelvy’s” identification stating that her real name was Christin Campbell-Martin, the officers arrested her for providing false identification information.

Sergeant Holland decided to impound the car and asked the man in the back seat to exit the vehicle. After the man got out of the car, Officer Holland started to search the vehicle and found a backpack on the floor of the front-seat passenger area. Inside of the backpack he found a bag of what he thought was methamphetamine. He also found $2,850.10 in cash, a small scoop, paperwork addressed to Leiva and Campbell-Martin, and smaller baggies. In the center console he found Leiva’s identification. After he finished searching, the car was impounded.

A federal grand jury indicted Campbell-Martin and Leiva on one count of possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance near a protected location and aiding and abetting the possession with intent to distribute. Campbell-Martin and Leiva moved to suppress the methamphetamine found in the car, arguing that the initial encounter was an unconstitutional seizure because Officer Hotz did not have probable cause or reasonable suspicion and that the warrantless search of the vehicle and its contents was an unconstitutional search. The district court denied the motion, concluding that the defendants were not seized when Officer Hotz first approached them, Officer Hotz had probable cause to command them to exit the car and arrest them, and the search of the car was a valid inventory search and search incident to arrest. Defendants conditionally pleaded guilty to possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance. 

The Eighth Circuit held that considering all the relevant circumstances, the officer's initial encounter with Campbell-Martin and Leiva was not a Fourth Amendment seizure because it was a consensual encounter. Officer Hotz’s conduct would not have communicated to a reasonable person that he could not leave. Officer Hotz was alone, she did not display a weapon, she did not touch the defendants, and she did not use forceful language. She parked beside the car rather than in front of or behind it so the driver would have been able to drive away. She also did not ask the occupants to get out of the car until she knew they had provided false names. Also, requesting identification or asking questions does not effect a seizure “as long as the police do not convey a message that compliance with their requests is required. When she asked for identification, her tone was conversational, she framed her request as a question, and she said “please.” And when she said, “What’s going on? Run me through. Something’s going on right now,” she did not use an authoritative tone of voice and she asked if Campbell-Martin was okay. 

Furthermore, even if it became nonconsensual, the officer had reasonable suspicion to question them and ask for identification. Even before Officer Hotz asked to see the defendants’ identification, she observed them drive into a school parking lot around 10:30 p.m., Campbell-Martin appeared to hide her face with her hands, and she did not look at Officer Hotz after Officer Hotz shined her spotlight on the driver’s window. And after approaching the car, Officer Hotz had reasonable suspicion to believe that Campbell-Martin was under the influence of drugs because she was “nervous and fidgety,” “[h]er speech was quick,” “her pupils were constricted,” and “[s]he kept pulling her knees to her chest and breathing really heavy.” Officer Hotz also observed that the two passengers were very quiet and did not look toward her. Based on Officer Hotz’s training and experience in dealing with individuals under the influence, she reasonably believed that Campbell-Martin might be under the influence. Officer Hotz had reasonable suspicion based on articulable facts to extend the encounter to investigate whether Campbell-Martin was driving under the influence.

The court also concluded that the search of the car and the backpack without a warrant was a lawful under the second *Gant* exception. The court held that it was reasonable to believe that the vehicle contained evidence of the offense of providing false identification information. Although the officers already knew that Campbell-Martin and Leiva provided false identification, they did not have Leiva’s actual identification, which would help prove that Leiva provided false identification. It was reasonable to think that his identification would be in the car because he had not given the officers any identification even after he was arrested. Therefore, the court affirmed the District Court’s denial of the motions to suppress.

 

People v. Cuadra
Court: California Courts of Appeal
Opinion Date: November 5, 2021
Tags:

At 2:15 a.m. on June 3, 2020, Deputy Zeas and his partner drove their patrol car into a parking lot and stopped five-six feet from where Cuadra was standing. Because of Black Lives Matter protests, there was a curfew in effect. Zeas asked Cuadra if he was aware of the curfew. Cuadra said no. Zeas did not cite Cuadra for a curfew violation; the curfew did not apply to persons on private property. Zeas then asked Cuadra if he was on parole or probation. Cuadra said he was on probation. Zeas then decided to detain Cuadra, who raised his hands and started to step backward away from the patrol car, while asking why the officers were “attempting to detain” him when he had done nothing wrong. After Cuardra raised his hands in response to Zeas, Zeas saw a "pretty big" “bulge” in Cuadra’s front pants pocket, consistent with the shape of a firearm. Cuadra “spontaneously” stated he had a gun. Zeas performed a patdown search and recovered a loaded revolver from his front pants pocket. The court of appeal reversed the denial of Cuadra’s motion to suppress. The firearm evidence was the fruit of the unlawful detention. The observation of the gun occurred when Cuadra submitted to a show of authority and his detention was not founded on reasonable suspicion, consent, or probable cause to arrest.

 

State v. Jordan
Court: Supreme Court of Ohio
Opinion Date: November 9, 2021
Tags: 

The Supreme Court held that neither a showing of exigent circumstances nor a showing of the impracticability of obtaining an arrest warrant is necessary to sustain the constitutionality of a warrantless arrest under either the Ohio Constitution or the United States Constitution. Defendant was convicted of multiple drug offenses. On appeal, Defendant challenged the trial court's denial of his motion to suppress, arguing that his arrest was unlawful because there were no exigent circumstances to justify a warrantless arrest. The court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding (1) a warrantless arrest based on probable cause and conducted in public is reasonable under the Fourth Amendment; (2) neither exigent circumstances nor the impracticability of obtaining a warrant is required to justify a warrantless felony arrest that is supported by probable cause and that is conducted in public; and (3) the arrest in this case was constitutionally valid.

 

Washington v. Bowman
Court: Washington Supreme Court
Opinion Date: November 10, 2021
Tags:

As cell phones made text messaging a ubiquitous form of communication, the Washington Supreme Court recognized that text message conversations constituted “a private affair protected by the state constitution from warrantless intrusion.” The Court in Washington v. Hinton, 319 P.3d 9 (2014), held that an individual whose text messages was unlawfully searched on an associate’s cell phone could challenge that search in a subsequent prosecution—rejecting the view in other states that any privacy interest in a text message was lost once the message was sent. In this case, the Supreme Court was asked to extend Hinton to prohibit law enforcement from using information obtained from the lawful, consensual search of a third party’s cell phone to set up a separate text message exchange on a different cell phone between Respondent Reece Bowman and an undercover agent posing as Bowman’s associate. Specifically, Bowman argued that both the search and the ruse violated his rights under article I, section 7 of the Washington State Constitution, as well as the Fourth Amendment to the United States Constitution, by intruding on a private affair without authority of law. The Supreme Court rejected these arguments, holding that a cell phone owner’s voluntary consent to search text messages on their phone provides law enforcement with the authority of law necessary to justify intruding on an otherwise private affair. Further, the Court held that a subsequent police ruse using lawfully obtained information did not constitute a privacy invasion or trespass in violation of either our state constitution or the United States Constitution. The Court of Appeals’ judgment was reversed and Bowman’s conviction reinstated.

 

Torcivia v. Suffolk County, New York
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit
Opinion Date: November 9, 2021
Tags:

Shortly after midnight, Suffolk County police officers went to Torcivia’s home in response to what was described as a violent domestic incident, after Torcivia’s daughter called an emergency child protection hotline. The officers determined that Torcivia, who admittedly had been drinking, needed to be transported to a state-run mental health facility for evaluation. While he was at the facility, the officers seized his firearms from his home pending further investigation. Torcivia argues that in doing so, the officers acted pursuant to an official county policy or custom that violated the Fourth Amendment, making the county subject to “Monell” liability. The Second Circuit affirmed the dismissal of Torcivia’s 42 U.S.C. 1983 claims. Although the evidence permitted a reasonable jury to find that it was a “standard procedure” for county officers to temporarily take action to “safeguard weapons until whatever investigation is done” if “there is a domestic incident and somebody is transported to CPEP,” the county is not liable under Monell. The policy falls within the “special needs” exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement; under these circumstances, the county’s policy did not cause a violation of Torcivia’s Fourth Amendment rights. Employees of the state-run mental health facility were entitled to qualified immunity under federal and New York law for claims related to their alleged failure to discharge Torcivia promptly.

 

Wesson v. Shoop
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 9, 2021
Tags:

Wesson was charged with murdering 81-year-old Varhola and attacking (and nearly killing) his 77-year-old wife, after they invited him into their home on February 25, 2008. A three-judge panel convicted Wesson of several charges, including two counts of aggravated murder, and imposed the death penalty. Wesson unsuccessfully sought to suppress his confession to police due to his alleged intoxication and other factors when they questioned him. On direct appeal, the Ohio Supreme Court vacated one of Wesson’s aggravated murder convictions but affirmed his remaining convictions and the death sentence; the court rejected Wesson’s claim that his alleged intoxication vitiated his Miranda waiver. Wesson sought relief under 28 U.S.C. 2254, alleging that he is intellectually disabled and therefore ineligible for the death penalty under Atkins v. Virginia, and the government violated his right against self-incrimination when it introduced his post-Miranda statement. The district court found that Wesson made a credible claim of intellectual disability and dismissed that claim and a related ineffective-assistance-of-counsel claim without prejudice to allow the state court to conduct an evidentiary hearing. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the denial of relief on Wesson’s second claim. The state courts did not unreasonably apply the law or facts with respect to his confession, which occurred when he allegedly was intoxicated.
