---
source: "5MAR2021.docx"
tags:  []
---

5MAR2021

United States v. Reedy   7thCIR   1MAR2021
Police responded to a call that a homeless person was sleeping in a car behind a store and found Reedy wearing a bulletproof vest in the front passenger seat of a Kia. They saw an open knife, crowbar, and walkie-talkie on the car’s floorboard. Reedy said that his friend, Jason, was visiting someone nearby. Telling Reedy to stay put with one officer, another officer looked for Jason and found him in a backyard wearing dress clothes yet claiming to be doing lawn work. Searching Jason’s backpack, officers found methamphetamine, credit cards in others’ names, latex gloves, rocks, knives, bolt cutters, shotgun ammo, and a walkie-talkie tuned to the same channel as Reedy’s. A search of the Kia turned up a shotgun. Reedy faced a federal gun possession charge. The Seventh Circuit affirmed the denial of Reedy’s motion to suppress. Officers had ample authority to direct Reedy to step out of his car and to subject him to further questioning and investigation consistent with Terry; there was no unreasonable delay in the execution of the Terry stop. This same sequence of events supplied the probable cause necessary to arrest Reedy. Once the police returned Jason to the car, the initial Terry stop of Reedy effectively turned into an arrest supported by probable cause for, at minimum, possession of burglarious tools.
 

United States v. Mercado-Gracia   10thCIR   2MAR2021
Defendant Aaron Mercado-Gracia challenged his three convictions for drug trafficking, conspiring to traffic drugs, and using a firearm in relation to a drug-trafficking offense. In upholding his convictions, the Tenth Circuit found the district court did not err in denying Mercado-Gracia’s motion to suppress evidence discovered as the result of a traffic stop. The traffic stop evolved into a consensual encounter during which the police officer developed reasonable suspicion to believe Mercado-Gracia was involved in drug trafficking. That reasonable suspicion justified a brief investigative detention, during which the officer deployed his drug-sniffing dog, which alerted, leading to the discovery of a gun and two kilograms of heroin in the car Mercado-Gracia was driving. Furthermore, the district court did not abuse its discretion in denying Mercado-Gracia’s request to play during voir dire a video to educate prospective jurors on implicit bias. Thus, finding no reversible error, the Tenth Circuit affirmed Mercado-Gracia's convictions.
 

Gaddy v. Georgia   GA SC   1MAR2021
William Gaddy was convicted of felony murder and related crimes in connection with the death of Addisyn Sanders, the two- year-old daughter of Gaddy’s girlfriend, Tiffany Harris. Gaddy generally watched Addisyn while Harris was at work during the day. Gaddy, Harris, and Addisyn moved in with Gaddy’s grandmother. Gaddy’s ten-year-old brother, C. F., who often visited, was playing video games in one of the home’s bedrooms while Gaddy and Addisyn watched television in the living room. C. F. heard Addisyn crying while she said “no” and “stop” just before there were three thumps that sounded like a head banging against a wall. Then, C. F. saw Gaddy carry Addisyn’s limp body to another bedroom and leave her there. On appeal, Gaddy argued the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress his custodial statement. After review of the trial court record, the Georgia Supreme Court found no reversible error and affirmed Gaddy's convictions.
 

State v. Lowman   NE SC   26FEB2021   
The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the district court convicting Defendant of possession of a controlled substance and two counts of carrying a concealed weapon, holding that there was no merit to Defendant's claims on appeal. On appeal, Defendant contended that the district court erred in overruling his motion to suppress, that he received ineffective assistance of counsel, and that the evidence was insufficient to convict him of carrying a concealed weapon. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding (1) because there was no Fourth Amendment violation the court properly overruled Defendant's motion to suppress; (2) there was sufficient evidence to support the verdict; and (3) trial counsel did not perform deficiently.
 

State v. Depina  RI SC  3MAR2021
The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of conviction and commitment entered in the superior court reflecting the fact that Defendant was found guilty of second-degree murder, holding that the trial justice did not err when she denied Defendant's motion to suppress. Before trial, Defendant filed a motion to videos located on a digital camera, arguing that the detectives who seized the camera improperly expended the scope of the judicially-approved warrant. The trial justice denied the motion. After a jury trial, Defendant was found guilty of second-degree murder and sentenced to life imprisonment. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the trial justice did not clearly err in denying the motion to suppress because, in seizing the camera, the police did not exceed the scope of the warrant.
 

USE OF FORCE
Hernandez v. Town of Gilbert   9thCIR   4MAR2021
The Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment based on qualified immunity to a police officer in a 42 U.S.C. 1983 action brought by plaintiff, alleging that the officer used excessive force when he deployed his police dog in effecting plaintiff's arrest for driving under the influence and resisting arrest. The panel concluded that no clearly established law governed the reasonableness of using a canine to subdue a noncompliant suspect who resisted other types of force and refused to surrender. In this case, following a brief police chase, plaintiff fled to his home where he activated the remote-controlled garage door opener, remained in control of his car inside the garage for eight minutes, refused multiple commands to get out of the car, and resisted lesser force employed by officers without effect while he continued resisting. The officer released his police dog to force compliance and, even after the dog bit him, plaintiff continued to resist. The panel explained that the initial deployment of the canine and the duration of the bite did not violate clearly established law.
