---
source: "BF 30APR 2021.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF 30APR 2021
United States v. Campbell   3rdCIR   2APR2021
In a cross-appeal in this case, the court rejected Campbell's argument that evidence discovered during the traffic stop leading to his arrest should have been suppressed because the traffic stop was impermissibly extended.  The court held that the officer did not unnecessarily prolong the stop. Approximately five minutes elapsed from the time the stop commenced to when Campbell was arrested. Although the officer suggested that Campbell look in the console a second time for his insurance card, the search for the insurance card and registration was a "plainly valid reason" to continue the stop. There was nothing nefarious in the suggestion to look in the console, as Campbell had not yet produced the necessary documents and the console is a commonly used storage compartment in vehicles.
*Side Note:*
*Campbell claims he was stopped because he is Black; however, he has provided no basis to support an Equal Protection claim. See Whren v. United States, 517 U.S. 806, 813 (1996) (“We of course agree with petitioners that the Constitution prohibits selective enforcement of the law based on considerations such as race. But the constitutional basis for objecting to intentionally discriminatory application of laws is the Equal Protection Clause, not the Fourth Amendment. Subjective intentions play no role in ordinary, probable-cause Fourth Amendment analysis.”*
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1-TitW3JTWJeZtpcwv4OqNtHELErfZ8-G/view?usp=sharing

United States v. Onyeri   5thCIR   28APR2021
The Fifth Circuit affirmed the District Court decision, rejecting arguments that the court erred by admitting evidence obtained from the traffic stop because it was not supported by probable cause or reasonable suspicion.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nHyMaUqRgzvTnsKbeNHNlZkWtLKK30qN/view?usp=sharing

United States v. Hammond   7thCIR   26APR2021
Over the course of a three-week crime spree in October 2017, Hammond robbed or attempted to rob, seven stores at gunpoint in Indiana and Michigan. Five of the seven incidents took place in northern Indiana, where Hammond was charged with five counts of Hobbs Act robbery and several attendant weapons charges, including one count of being a felon in possession of a firearm, 18 U.S.C. 922(g), and two counts of brandishing a weapon during a crime of violence, 18 U.S.C. 924(c). Convicted, he was sentenced to 47 years in prison. The Seventh Circuit affirmed, rejecting arguments that the district court should have suppressed certain cell site location information (CSLI) that law enforcement collected to locate him during his robbery spree and to confirm his location on the days of the robberies, that the district court erred in instructing the jury regarding the felon-in-possession charge under the Supreme Court’s “Rehaif” decision, and that Hobbs Act robbery is not a crime of violence under 18 U.S.C. 924(c) or under the Sentencing Guidelines, so his section 924(c) conviction must be overturned, and his sentence vacated. **The collection of Hammond’s real-time CSLI was not a search; the resulting traffic stop was valid.**
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1nHyMaUqRgzvTnsKbeNHNlZkWtLKK30qN/view?usp=sharing

United States v. Whitehead   8thCir   26APR2021
The Eighth Circuit affirmed defendant's conviction for illegally possessing drugs and a firearm. The court agreed with the district court that the protective-sweep exception justified the initial search. In this case, when the victim opened the door of the hotel room, the room was dark, the officers saw movement, and they could not tell how many people were there. Combined with defendant's extensive history, these articulable facts gave officers a reasonable belief that there might be others in the room who posed a danger to them. Furthermore, the search did not exceed the scope of the lawful protective sweep when officers checked under the mattress for hidden fugitives. The court also agreed with the district court that consent justified the later reentry into the room to retrieve the gun. Finally, the court concluded that the evidence was sufficient to support defendant's conviction for being a felon in possession of a firearm where the government presented sufficient evidence of constructive possession.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/14SEZqI9FuuofRX-5Oj3Ffd22zOYC_KDq/view?usp=sharing

United States v. Cotto   10thCIR   27APR2021
Defendant-appellant Omil Cotto was charged with three drug and gun-related offenses stemming from a road rage incident. Prior to trial, Cotto filed a motion to suppress evidence officers had obtained from a residence in Albuquerque, New Mexico. He argued: (1) the affidavit supporting the warrant did not provide probable cause for the search of the house; and (2) provisions in the warrant authorizing seizure of “all firearm evidence” and “any cellphones” were overbroad. The district court denied the motion to suppress. Cotto then pleaded guilty to lesser charges but expressly preserved his right to appeal the court’s order on the suppression motion. The Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court’s denial of the motion to suppress, finding: (1) the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule applied to the search and seizure here; (2) the officers acted in objectively reasonable reliance on the warrant while conducting the search of the residence; and (3) even if the warrant’s cell phone provision was overbroad, that provision could and should have been severed from the remaining valid portions of the warrant.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NnGswTBqVWKCfJ8OTU3XCsSkFIT9XnAJ/view?usp=sharing

United States v. Guillen   10thCIR   27APR2021
After a young woman found a pressure cooker bomb hidden under her bed, law enforcement agents went to the home of the only person she said might want to harm her: defendant-appellant Ethan Guillen. The agents entered Ethan’s home, questioned him, and obtained consent from his father to search the residence. During the search, the agents found evidence in Ethan’s bedroom indicating his involvement with the pressure cooker bomb. When one of the agents confronted Ethan with the information and evidence they had collected, he confessed to making the bomb. The agent immediately provided Ethan Miranda warnings, but he proceeded to make more incriminating statements. Ethan ultimately entered a conditional plea of guilty to possession of an unregistered destructive device and an attempt to damage or destroy a building by means of fire or an explosive. His plea agreement reserved the right to appeal the district court’s order denying his motion to suppress the physical evidence and incriminating statements resulting from the search of his home. Exercising that right, Ethan argued to the Tenth Circuit that the district court should have suppressed the physical evidence found in his home because the agents’ warrantless entry and search of his bedroom violated his Fourth Amendment rights. He also contended the district court should have suppressed the incriminating statements he made after receiving Miranda warnings because the agents elicited them through coercion and used an impermissible two-step interrogation technique to end run around Miranda. Finding no violation of his rights or any other reversible error, the Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's judgment.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1GtQiYTm2nd1rvV5rZtugpUscgJTgoR-5/view?usp=sharing

Trott v. State   MDCOA   23APR2021
The Court of Appeals affirmed the judgment of the circuit court denying Defendant's motion to suppress, holding that, under the circumstances presented in this case, the police had reasonable suspicion to conduct a brief investigatory detention of Defendant, and the stop did not violate the parameters of the Fourth Amendment. In response to an anonymous 911 call that provided the location and license plate of a vehicle driven by a possibly intoxicated driver, the responding police officer located he vehicle in a parking lot, knocked on the window, and spoke to Defendant, who admitted to having had multiple drinks and that his driver's license was revoked. Defendant was arrested after he was unable to successfully complete a field sobriety test. On appeal, Defendant argued that the anonymous call could not support a finding of reasonable suspicion. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that, under the totality of the circumstances, the stop at issue comported with the reasonable suspicion requirement of the Fourth Amendment.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/14CKxuDRTayGO9IX2Z0J1Dtx68TScW8sA/view?usp=sharing

Michigan v. Pagano   MISCt   22APR2021
Victoria Pagano was charged with operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated with a child as a passenger, and having an open container in a vehicle. An anonymous caller phoned 911, alleging defendant was driving while intoxicated. Central dispatch informed a police officer of the call, and within 30 minutes, the officer observed defendant’s vehicle but did not see defendant commit any traffic violations. Although it appeared that a copy of the 911 call might have been preserved, a recording was not introduced into evidence, and the caller was not identified. According to the officer’s testimony, the anonymous caller informed dispatch that defendant was out of the vehicle, yelling at children, and appeared to be obnoxious. The caller believed defendant’s alleged intoxication was the cause of her behavior with the children, and provided the vehicle’s license plate number; the direction in which the vehicle was traveling; and the vehicle’s make, model, and color. The officer pulled defendant over strictly on the basis of the information relayed in the 911 call. Defendant was arrested and subsequently charged. Defendant moved for dismissal of the charges, arguing that the investigatory stop was unlawful and that, as a result, any evidence obtained pursuant to the stop should have been suppressed. The district court granted the motion, holding that there was no probable cause to stop defendant’s vehicle because the 911 call was not reliable. The Michigan Supreme Court affirmed the trial court.
https://drive.google.com/file/d/1l1SVCtwhotTWpx-tqYh-p_chPtg0ekeX/view?usp=sharing

USE OF FORCE
Wilson v. Lamp   8thCIR   26APR2021
Plaintiff and his son filed suit against three officers under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging violations of the Fourth Amendment, violation of the Iowa Constitution, and common law invasion of privacy. The district court denied summary judgment, but reversed in part and remanded for trial. On remand, the district court held a trial on the state law claims, as well as the federal excessive force claim. On the state claims for invasion of privacy and Iowa illegal search or seizure, the district court granted judgment as a matter of law. The jury found in favor of defendants on the excessive force claims. In Wilson I, the Eighth Circuit ruled that defendants' acts were reasonable as a matter of law. The court explained that the substantive standard for search and seizure does not vary between Iowa and federal law. Therefore, any error was harmless, since it would not change the result: regardless of who theoretically must show the officers' conduct was reasonable, defendants did show their conduct was reasonable. Accordingly, the district court did not err in granting judgment as a matter of law and denying plaintiff's motion for a new trial on the state search and seizure claims. The court also concluded that the district court did not err in granting judgment as a matter of law and denying plaintiff's motion for a new trial on the invasion of privacy claim. In this case, plaintiff cannot state a claim for intrusion upon seclusion because the officers' conduct was not a highly offensive intrusion on the private affairs or concerns of plaintiffs, and the stop of plaintiff's vehicle was lawful. The court also concluded that the district court properly instructed the jury on the elements of Fourth Amendment and Iowa Constitution excessive force claims. Because the Iowa Supreme Court's standard for excessive force does not materially differ from the federal standard, the court explained that the district court did not need to separately instruct the jury. Accordingly, the court affirmed the judgment.

Tobias v. Arteaga   9thCIR   27APR2021
After plaintiff, who was thirteen years old at the time, confessed to a murder he did not commit, he was convicted in juvenile court and sentenced to 25 years' imprisonment. The California Court of Appeal reversed the conviction, concluding that plaintiff's confession should have been suppressed by the juvenile court because detectives failed to respect his unambiguous request for an attorney. All parties now agree that plaintiff did not commit the murder. Plaintiff subsequently filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983 against the three LAPD Detectives who conducted the interrogation in which plaintiff confessed to killing the victim, alleging violations of his Fifth and Fourteenth Amendment rights. The Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity on the Fifth Amendment claims that the officers continued to question plaintiff after he invoked his right to silence and that they engaged in unconstitutional coercive questioning tactics. However, the panel reversed the denial of qualified immunity on defendant's Fourteenth Amendment substantive due process claim because it was not clearly established that the abusive interrogation techniques used by the officers rose to the level of "abuse of power that shocks the conscience." The panel remanded for further proceedings.
