---
source: "15JAN2021 Cases.docx"
tags:  []
---

15JAN2021 Cases
United States v. Mumme  1stCIR 13JAN21
The First Circuit affirmed Defendant's conviction of possession of child pornography and sentence of ninety-six months' imprisonment followed by lifetime supervised release, holding that Defendant's arguments on appeal were without merit. Specifically, the First Circuit held (1) the district court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress statements made to investigating officers at his home and the evidence derived from the consensual seizure of his computer; (2) police officers did not unconstitutionally intrude onto the curtilage of Defendant's home; and (3) the district court did not err in denying Defendant's renewed motion to withdraw his guilty plea.
 

United States v. Magallon  8thCIR 8JAN21
A grand jury indicted Defendants Magallon and Garcia Ortiz with conspiracy to distribute 500 grams or more of a mixture and substance containing methamphetamine and at least 50 grams of actual methamphetamine. Garcia Ortiz was also indicted with possession with intent to distribute at least 500 grams of a mixture and substance containing methamphetamine. Garcia Ortiz conditionally pleaded guilty to the conspiracy charge, and Magallon was convicted by a jury of the conspiracy charge. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of Garcia Ortiz's motion to suppress evidence where officers had an objectively reasonable suspicion that the GMC Sierra's occupants were involved in criminal activity, namely drug distribution; reasonable suspicion clearly existed to justify the stop and remained present as further information unfolded during the stop; and the officers did not exceed the mission of the stop. Furthermore, the district court did not err in finding that Garcia Ortiz consented to the search of the Lexus. The court also affirmed the district court's denial of Garcia Ortiz's motion to suppress his post-Miranda statements. In this case, defendant voluntarily waived his rights against self-incrimination and to counsel. Finally, the court held that the district court did not err in denying Magallon's request for a willful blindness instruction, and the evidence was sufficient to support defendant his conspiracy conviction.
 

United States v. Warren  8thCIR 12JAN21 
The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress controlled substances found at the time of his arrest as fruits of an unlawful seizure and the district court's determination that defendant is a career offender. The court agreed with the district court that the officer's polite request for defendant to stay with him was not a command and defendant's compliance did not convert the request into a command. Even if the officer's request is construed as a command that defendant remain in the parked vehicle, the court agreed with the district court that officer safety concerns made this brief seizure objectively reasonable under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1, 21 (1968). The court also held that circuit precedent foreclosed defendant's contention that the district court did not err in concluding defendant was a career offender based on his three Illinois controlled substance offenses and his Iowa conviction for domestic assault with strangulation. The court need not consider the government's alternative argument that any error was harmless.
 

United States v. King  9thCIR  14JAN21
The Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress firearms and dismissal of the remainder of his appeal as waived. Defendant had entered a conditional guilty plea to being a felon in possession. The panel concluded that the search warrant did not violate the Fourth Amendment where the warrant sufficiently justified the search for and seizure of "any firearm" and the good faith exception also justifies denying the suppression motion. The panel also concluded that defendant's knowing and voluntary appellate waiver precludes defendant from appealing his career offender sentence enhancement. Finally, the panel rejected defendant's contention that he should be allowed to withdraw his plea and enter a new agreement preserving his right to appeal his sentence because the district court violated Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(c)(1) by participating in his plea negotiations. As a threshold matter, the panel disagreed with the government's contention that this claim is subsumed by defendant's appellate waiver and that the panel has no jurisdiction to consider it. The panel concluded that neither of the two instances defendant alleged demonstrated inappropriate judicial pressure on plea negotiations.
 

United States v. Jenkins DCCIR 8JAN2021
Appellant was charged with two counts of possession of a firearm by a felon, 18 U.S.C. 922(g), and one count of simple possession of a controlled substance, 21 U.S.C. 844(a). Appellant conditionally pleaded guilty to the firearms charges and preserved his ability to appeal the denial of his motion to suppress evidence. The DC Circuit affirmed the district court's judgment, holding that appellant's motion to suppress was properly denied where the vehicles' in-tandem driving to and from the scene of a shooting is suggestive of a conspiracy to perpetrate the shooting, in a way that mere presence as a passenger during what might have been an outwardly lawful transaction is not. Furthermore, despite the passage of time, the evidence gathered by the police was sufficient to establish probable cause to search one of the vehicles when it was seized. Finally, the court held that, while it would have been better if the district court had expressly omitted the disputed sentencing points from its calculation of the criminal history score, the record is sufficiently clear that the points did not affect the sentence. Accordingly, the court affirmed appellant's conviction and sentence.
 

State v. Mixton  Arizona Supreme Court  11JAN2021
The Supreme Court affirmed Defendant's convictions, holding that neither the United States nor the Arizona Constitution requires a search warrant or court order for a law enforcement officer to obtain either a user's Internet Protocol (IP) address or subscriber information the user voluntarily provides to an Internet Service Provider (ISP) as a condition or attribute of service. Defendant was indicted on twenty counts of sexual exploitation of a minor under fifteen years of age. Defendant filed a motion to suppress on the grounds that the United States Fourth Amendment and Ariz. Const. art. II, 8 required a warrant or court order to obtain his IP address and ISP subscriber information. The motion was denied, and a jury convicted Defendant on all counts. The court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the State lawfully obtained the challenged information with a valid federal administrative subpoena because neither the Fourth Amendment nor article 2, section 8 of the Arizona Constitution requires law enforcement officials to secure a search warrant or court order to obtain IP addresses or subscriber information voluntarily provided to ISPs as a condition or attribute of service.
 

California v. Sims CCA 12JAN2021
Defendant Tony Sims appealed after he pleaded guilty to two counts of possession of a firearm by a felon and one count of unlawful possession of ammunition. He contended the trial court erred in denying a motion to suppress incriminating evidence obtained during a warrantless search of his vehicle. Defendant also argued he was entitled to seek a reduction of his three-year probation term under recently-enacted Assembly Bill No. 1950 (Stats. 2020, ch. 328, sec. 2). Relying on In re Estrada, 63 Cal.2d 740 (1965), defendant claimed Assembly Bill No. 1950’s limitation on the maximum duration of felony probation terms constituted an ameliorative change to the criminal law that applied retroactively to cases that were not reduced to final judgment as of the new law’s effective date. The Court of Appeal concluded the trial court properly denied the motion to suppress because the search of defendant’s vehicle was valid under the automobile exception to the warrant requirement and, in the alternative, as a search incident to arrest. With respect to his second argument, the Court of Appeal agreed. Judgment was affirmed as to his conviction, but reversed in part as to defendant's sentence. The matter was remanded for resentencing.
 

State v. Briggs  NebSC 8JAN2021
The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the court of appeals affirming Defendant's conviction of two counts of possession of a controlled substance, holding that the district court erred in denying Defendant's motion to suppress evidence found during a warrantless search of Defendant's vehicle. On appeal, Defendant argued that the State failed to meet its burden of proving that the search fell within the inventory search exception to the warrant requirement. The court of appeals disagreed, concluding that the police did not use the inventory search as pretext for a general rummaging in order to discover incriminating evidence. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that it was not possible on the record to determine whether the search was conducted in conformity with Omaha Police Department's standardized procedures governing inventory searches; and (2) therefore, the State failed to meet its burden to show that the search fell within the inventory search exception.
 

North Dakota v. Casatelli  ND SC  12JAN2021
Garett Casatelli appealed a corrected criminal judgment after he entered a conditional guilty plea to actual physical control of a motor vehicle with a blood alcohol concentration of 0.08 percent or greater. After review of the trial court record, the North Dakota Supreme Court concluded Casatelli was not seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment or N.D. Const. art. I, sec. 8, and the district court did not err in denying his motion to suppress evidence.
 

USE OF FORCE CASES
Farge v. Parks   1stCIR   13JAN2021
Use of Force, Deadly Force, Shooting at vehicle
The First Circuit affirmed the order of the district court granting summary judgment against Plaintiff, acting as the personal representative of the estate of Ambrosia Fagre (Amber), on claims related to Amber's death, holding that the district court did not err when it granted Trooper Jeffrey Parks's motion for summary judgment on Plaintiff's 42 U.S.C. 1983 claim. Plaintiff's complaint alleged use of excessive force against Amber in violation of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments under section 1983 and use of excessive force against Amber in violation of Me. Const. art. I, 5 under the Maine Civil Rights Act, failure to protect Amber in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment, and negligence and wrongful death under Maine state law. The district court granted Trooper Parks's motion for summary judgment. The First Circuit affirmed, holding (1) summary judgment on Plaintiff's section 1983 claim was warranted, and Trooper Parks was also entitled to qualified immunity; and (2) the district court did not err by granting summary judgment on Plaintiff's state law claims because Trooper Parks was entitled to immunity under the Maine Tort Claims Act, Me. Stat. Tit. 14, 8111(1).
