---
source: "5 BF 4FEB2022.docx"
tags:  []
---

4FEB2022

Stanton v. Elliott
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Opinion Date: February 1, 2022

Use of Force, Deadly Force, Qualified Immunity

West Virginia State Troopers Elliott and Cornelius received three 911 calls about Spencer Lee Crumbley. Two different callers stated that Crumbley was armed and dangerous and keeping his family hostage. Another caller stated Crumbley made threats about shooting the police. It was also rumored that Crumbley had drug connections. Having all this information, the troopers went to Crumbley’s house. Upon their arrival, Crumbley came out of the house screaming and threatened a shootout. He had nothing in his hands but threatened to get a weapon. Crumbley went between the yard where the troopers were and the house, threatening to get a weapon and shoot the troopers. Crumbley pulled down his pants to expose his genitals while spinning in a circle. Crumbley then got a shovel, threatened the troopers with it, then ran, throwing the shovel. Trooper Cornelius fell in the snow. When Trooper Elliott turned a corner, he saw Crumbley turned away from him. Crumbley then abruptly turned toward Trooper Elliott and began to raise his hands, causing Trooper Elliot to believe that he might have a gun. Trooper Elliott shot Crumbley, killing him. Crumbley did not have a gun. 

In a civil suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, the Fourth Circuit reversed the district court’s grant of qualified immunity to Trooper Elliott. The court noted that the fact Crumbley was shot in the back raised a genuine factual dispute regarding Trooper Elliot’s version of events. The disputed facts might show a violation of a clearly established constitutional right (excessive force) and therefore qualified immunity on summary judgment was not proper and the district court’s grant of qualified immunity was reversed.

United States v. Hobbs
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Opinion Date: February 1, 2022

Cell Phone Ping, Exigent Circumstances, Emergency Exigency

Erick Hobbs’ former girlfriend, Jaquanna Foreman, called Baltimore County police around 7:00 p.m. and stated that Hobbs had come to the back of her home, brandished a semi-automatic handgun, and used the gun to break a window. Hobbs then forcibly entered the home, removed a television, and threatened to kill Foreman and her seven-year-old daughter and other family members. Hobbs then stated if Foreman contacted the police, he would kill any responding officers. Foreman told detectives Hobbs had a criminal record and she had previously seen him armed with assault rifles and that he was “obsessed with firearms.” Detective Nesbitt verified that Hobbs had a violent criminal history and concluded that there was “an extreme urgent threat.” Around midnight, he submitted an “exigent form” to T-Mobile, Hobbs’ cell phone provider. T-Mobile responded with real-time “pings” that alerted Nesbitt to Hobbs’ general location. Another detective used call logs obtained from T-Mobile to determine which of Hobbs’ associates lived within the geographical range of each “ping.” About six hours after the domestic incident, officers attempted a traffic stop of Hobbs’ vehicle. Hobbs tried to flee but collided with a parked vehicle. Officers placed Hobbs under arrest and recovered a loaded handgun. Later that night, Detective Nesbitt secured a search warrant for Hobbs’ car, and two days later obtained a search warrant for the same cell phone information obtained earlier pursuant to the “exigent form.” The police also executed a separate search warrant for Hobbs’ residence and seized 65 rounds of ammunition from his home.

Hobbs moved to suppress evidence of the firearm, arguing that the exigent circumstances exception to the warrant requirement did not justify the use of the cell phone “pings” and call logs. This was a case of first impression for the Fourth Circuit as they had never determined whether the exigent circumstances exception applied in the context of police using a cell phone ping along with call logs from a suspect’s cell phone. The court embraced the Second Circuit’s analysis applying the emergency exigency to cell phone pings. The court held that the officers reasonably concluded that Hobbs was armed and dangerous, that he posed an imminent threat to Foreman, to her family members, and to law enforcement officers, and that these exigent circumstances required them to seek the cell phone location information from T-Mobile without delay. Accordingly, the Fourth Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion to suppress. 

United States v. Martinez
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Opinion Date: February 1, 2022

United States Postal Inspector Gary Arias was contacted by a postal employee at the USPS facility in El Centro, California, regarding two suspicious packages. The postal employee informed Arias that: (1) the mailer paid the postage fees for the packages with cash; (2) the information on the shipping labels was handwritten; (3) the handwriting on the shipping labels for the two packages appeared identical, as though the same person filled out both shipping labels, yet the purported senders’ names on the labels were different; (4) both packages were being sent to the same area, Shreveport, Louisiana, but to different addresses there; and (5) the man1 paying the postage fees appeared to be anxious or nervous and did not engage the postal employee in conversation. Based on this information, Arias requested that the packages be forwarded to him at the San Diego field office for further investigation.

Two days later Arias received the packages. He examined the outside of the packages and observed that the size, shape, and appearance of the packages were consistent with USPS drug package profile characteristics. Arias also used a database to check the names and addresses written on the shipping labels of the two packages. Although the database was able to locate the addresses, it was unable to associate the names to those addresses. This information indicated to Arias that that the names provided on the labels did not receive mail at and were not otherwise associated with the addresses. Six days later, Arias contacted a border patrol officer to perform a canine sniff of the packages. Arias was unable to arrange for a canine examination prior to that date because he had to work on other cases, and he missed work due to illness. The dog alerted to both packages, indicating that the odor or aroma of one or more controlled substances emanated from the packages. Eight days later, Arias obtained search warrants and searched the packages, discovering 2,222 grams of methamphetamine inside. 

Martinez moved to suppress the packages and their contents, arguing that the packages were seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment. Martinez argued Arias did not have the requisite reasonable suspicion to detain the packages, that the 17-day delay between the detention of the packages and their search was unreasonable, and that the probable cause determination made on the warrants was invalid because they contained incorrect information. 

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress the drugs found in two packages. Based on the aggregate of factors, and contrary to defendant's contentions, the court concluded that the postal employee had reasonable suspicion to detain the packages. The court also concluded that the 17-day delay between the detention of the package and its search did not constitute an unreasonable, warrantless seizure in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The court noted that the relevant factors to consider in determining reasonableness include investigatory diligence, the length of the detention, and whether there were circumstances beyond the investigator’s control. Under the facts in this case, the eight-day delay between the establishment of probable cause and obtaining the search warrants was reasonable. Finally, defendant's argument that the search warrants were invalid is meritless. Accordingly, the court affirmed defendant's conviction and sentence.

*Blue Key Case for USPS packages: **United States v. Van Leeuwen, 397 U.S. 249** **(1970)*

United States v. Cooper
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: February 3, 2022

Inevitable discovery, protective sweep

Several law enforcement agencies executed a warrant for Cooper’s arrest on suspicion of firearms and narcotics charges. Among them was the Shelby County Sheriff’s Department Fugitive Apprehension Team, which had been called in to assist. At a pre-arrest meeting, the Team learned that Cooper was known to be a high-ranking gang member; and the Team was shown a Facebook photo of Cooper holding a Glock handgun with a fully loaded high-capacity magazine. Officers from the Team and other police agencies traveled to the home of Cooper’s girlfriend, Angel Walton, where they expected to find Cooper.

When Officer Joshua Fox knocked on the door, Walton answered. Through the doorway, Fox saw Cooper sitting on the living room couch. Concerned about spooking Cooper into fleeing, Fox showed Walton a photograph of another individual (someone he knew was not at Walton’s home) and asked if that person was there. Walton, as expected, said “no.” Fox nonetheless asked whether he could come inside to look for the individual, and, according to Fox’s later testimony, Walton agreed.1 Fox proceeded to arrest Cooper while the rest of the officers—at least five more—rushed into the home and spread out to conduct a protective sweep. Aiming to discover any armed confederates who might ambush them, the officers swiftly checked each room of the house, “wherever a body could hide.” Jeffrey Jensen, the officer checking the back bedroom, noticed a lump in the mattress, flipped it over, and discovered the Glock handgun depicted in Cooper’s Facebook post.

As soon as Jensen called out his discovery, Fox retrieved rights-waiver and consent-to-search forms from his vehicle. He went over both with Walton. The first form listed Walton’s Miranda rights and included spaces to fill in information about the recently found firearm; the second asked whether Walton consented to a search of her home. Walton placed her initials next to lines stating that she was consenting freely, that she had not been threatened or coerced, and that she had been treated fairly. With Walton’s consent, officers conducted a more thorough search but recovered only a hat matching the one Cooper had been wearing in his Facebook photo.

Charged with possessing a firearm as a felon, 18 U.S.C. 922(g), Cooper unsuccessfully moved to suppress the gun. The district court concluded that although the protective sweep was unlawful, Walton’s subsequent consent was voluntary, that her consent was sufficiently attenuated from the illegal sweep, and that officers would have inevitably discovered the gun in the lawful consent search.

The Sixth Circuit vacated and remanded, noting that the district court largely engaged in an attenuation analysis focused on whether Walton’s subsequent consent was sufficiently attenuated from the illegal protective sweep. The court held that this was the wrong analysis. The gun was seized during the initial unlawful search, so inevitable discovery is the correct analysis. On remand, the court should focus on whether officers would have sought and obtained Walton’s consent to search If the illegal protective sweep had never happened and whether the ensuing consent search would have led to the gun.

United States v. Skaggs
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Opinion Date: February 2, 2022

Border Search, Search of Digital Storage Device, Cellphone Search

Skaggs was charged with 12 counts related to his production and possession of child pornography, based on evidence found in thumb drives seized from him during a warrantless border search at Minneapolis-St. Paul International Airport. The district court denied a motion to suppress, convicted Skaggs of all counts. Believing a life sentence was mandatory because of his prior state conviction for sexual misconduct with a minor, the court sentenced him to life in prison. The Seventh Circuit affirmed. No court has ever required more than reasonable suspicion for a border search An investigation revealed that Skaggs had a prior sexual misconduct conviction; traveled abroad multiple times and was involved with overseas orphanages; posted suggestive pictures on Facebook of himself with young girls; was the director of Ukrainian Angels, whose name appeared to be borrowed from a well-known child pornography website; and was suspected of child sex tourism and traveling to Ukraine to meet minors. Skaggs lied during his customs interview, stating that he had no thumb drives with him. These facts, taken together, give rise to reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. The district court said it would have imposed a life sentence in any event and discussed the section 3553(a) factors that supported the sentence, any error was harmless.
