---
source: "49 BF 3DEC2021.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF 3DEC2021

Gillispie v. Miami Township
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 30, 2021

Grady Violation, Due Process Eyewitness Identification

Gillispie was convicted of two 1988 rapes and spent more than 20 years in prison before Ohio courts vacated his convictions, based on his claims of failure to disclose exculpatory evidence and actual innocence. Gillispie brought 42 U.S.C. 1983 claims against Moore, the police officer responsible for much of the investigation and the identification of Gillispie as the likely perpetrator. Gillispie alleges that Moore suppressed exculpatory evidence, arranged an unduly suggestive eyewitness identification procedure, fabricated inculpatory evidence, assisted in maliciously prosecuting him, and destroyed exculpatory evidence. Moore claims entitlement to qualified immunity. The district court determined that each of Gillispie’s claims should proceed to trial. The Sixth Circuit dismissed an appeal for lack of jurisdiction. Moore’s argument on appeal is simply a challenge to the district court’s determinations that genuine issues of material fact exist on the core claims. Defendants cannot appeal a denial of a motion for summary judgment based on qualified immunity insofar as that order determines whether the pretrial record sets forth a “genuine” issue of fact for trial. “An appeal choosing to take this tack anyway delays the administration of our justice system and is a waste of judicial resources.”

United States v. Meyer
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: December 2, 2021

Destruction Exigency

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress evidence and defendant's sentence imposed after he pleaded guilty to one count of sexual exploitation of children. In this case, federal agents, who were concerned that defendant would destroy evidence if he were allowed to go back inside, entered defendant's house without a warrant and took two computers, a cell phone, and a hard drive. The court concluded that the circumstances were suspicious enough that the agents could have reasonably concluded that there was a substantial chance that defendant was involved in criminal activity. The court also concluded that the officers had a sufficient basis to reasonably believe that defendant would imminently destroy evidence, and thus defendant's conduct created an exigency. Therefore, the warrantless search did not violate the Fourth Amendment because the officers had probable cause, the exigency was real, and it was not of the agents' making. Finally, any error in the district court's statement at sentencing was harmless.

State v. Willis
Court: Supreme Court of Hawaii
Opinion Date: December 2, 2021

Exigency Entry into Dwelling

The Supreme Court held that the gravity of a crime, by itself, does not establish an exigency empowering law enforcement officers to bypass the warrant requirement and that the State must articulate objective facts showing an immediate law enforcement need for the entry to support a warrantless home intrusion under the exigency exception. The State invoked the exigent circumstances exception to justify a warrantless home entry into Defendant's residence. Defendant was subsequently indicted for attempted murder in the second degree. Defendant moved to suppress the evidence found during the search of his residence, arguing that the police lacked exigent circumstances to enter his residence without a warrant. The trial court granted the motion to suppress. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the police entered Defendant's home without exigent circumstances, permission, or a warrant, and therefore, the circuit court properly suppressed the evidence.
