---
source: "BF42 18OCT2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF42 18OCT 2024

Search and Seizure Cases

FIFTH CIRCUIT

**Rucker v. Marshall**
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
October 14, 2024
Docket: 23-60557

*LEO LAW Topics **1-7, 9-4**: **Officer had reasonable suspicion to detain **the **suspect in a hotel parking lot known for drug activity. **The suspect’s refusal to provide identification or exit the vehicle established probable cause to arrest, and the use of force **to effectuate the arrest was reasonable** (based on BWC video)**. *

At around 0300 in February 2021 in Senatobia, Mississippi, Officer James Marshall observed Rodney Rucker sitting in a running car outside the Dreamland Inn.  Dreamland Inn is a hotel known for drugs, prostitution, and other criminal activity. In 2020 alone, the police department received over 74 citizen complaints concerning Dreamland. After watching him for several minutes and running the car’s plates, Officer Marshall approached Rucker. Rucker asked who called him in, and Marshall told him nobody had—he had just noticed Rucker while on patrol. Marshall asked Rucker if he was staying at the hotel. Rucker said he was in room 105 and explained he was warming up the car because it was cold. At that point, Officer Marshall asked for identification. Rucker refused to identify himself. Marshall then ordered Rucker to exit the vehicle. Rucker rolled up the window and refused to exit. After additional officers arrived, they broke Rucker’s window, forcibly removed him, and arrested him. The officers searched Rucker and his car, finding no drugs but discovering his driver’s license in his front pocket. Marshall arrested Rucker for failure to comply and resisting arrest. 

The charges were eventually dropped, and Rucker sued the officers under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging unlawful seizure and arrest, First Amendment retaliation, excessive force, and bystander liability. The district court denied the officers' motion for summary judgment on all claims, finding genuine disputes of material fact regarding the officers' reasonable suspicion, the alleged manufacturing of evidence, potential retaliation, and the reasonableness of the force used. The officers appealed, arguing that they were entitled to qualified immunity.

On appeal, the Fifth Circuit found that the bodycam footage clearly showed that Officer Marshall had reasonable suspicion to stop and question Rucker based on the time, location, and Rucker’s behavior. The court also determined that Marshall had probable cause to arrest Rucker for failing to comply with lawful commands and for operating a vehicle without displaying a driver’s license. Additionally, the court held that the officers did not use excessive force, as Rucker’s repeated refusals to comply justified their actions. Consequently, the officers were entitled to qualified immunity on all claims, including the bystander liability claim against Officer Carter. The case was remanded for entry of summary judgment in favor of the officers.

STATE CASES

**State v. Garrison**
Connecticut Supreme Court
October 15, 2024

*LEO LAW **T**opic** 7-3**:** The suspect at a hospital was not in “arrest-like” custody for Miranda purposes; therefore, Miranda warnings were not required before questioning the suspect. *

The defendant was convicted of assault in the first degree after an altercation with a friend, during which he stabbed the friend multiple times. Following the incident, the defendant sought medical treatment at a hospital for injuries sustained during the fight. While at the hospital, he was questioned by several police officers without being advised of his Miranda rights. The defendant moved to suppress the statements made during these interactions, arguing that he was in custody and subject to interrogation without proper Miranda warnings.

The trial court denied the motion to suppress, finding that the defendant was not in custody during the hospital questioning. The court noted that the defendant was not handcuffed, was coherent despite his intoxication, and was not subjected to prolonged or aggressive questioning. The defendant was subsequently found guilty of assault in the first degree and sentenced to ten years of incarceration, suspended after seven years, with five years of probation.

The intermediate appellate court reversed the conviction, concluding that the defendant was in custody for *Miranda* purposes when questioned by the police at the hospital. The court reasoned that the presence of multiple officers, the defendant's physical condition, and the nature of the questioning created a custodial environment. The appellate court held that the trial court should have suppressed the statements and remanded the case for a new trial.

On appeal, the Connecticut Supreme Court held that the defendant was not in custody during the hospital interactions and reversed the lower appellate court's decision. The court found that the police did not physically restrain the defendant, the questioning was not aggressive or prolonged, and the defendant was informed that he was free to leave for “police purposes.” The court concluded that a reasonable person in the defendant's position would not have felt a restraint on freedom of movement to the degree associated with a formal arrest. Therefore, the police were not required to administer Miranda warnings, and the trial court's denial of the motion to suppress was affirmed.
**State v. Edwards**
South Dakota Supreme Court
October 16, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **5-13**:** The probable cause **for a warrantless** search **of a** vehicle **under the automobile exception **extended to all containers within it, including the personal belongings of passengers.*

A Sturgis police officer initiated a traffic stop after observing a vehicle driven without an illuminated headlamp. The driver was arrested after law enforcement found methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia on his person. Wanda Edwards, a passenger, was then asked to step out of the vehicle so they could search the car and its contents. Edwards refused to turn over
her purse, which was inside the car. Law enforcement forcibly took Edwards’ purse, searched it, and found a small amount of methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia. Edwards was charged with possession of a controlled substance, possession of marijuana, and obstructing a law enforcement officer. She moved to suppress the evidence found in her purse as a violation of her Fourth Amendment rights. The trial court denied the motion, and she was convicted.

On appeal, the intermediate appellate court denied Edwards' motion to suppress, ruling that the search of the vehicle and its contents, including Edwards' purse, was lawful as it was incident to the driver's arrest. The court concluded that the purse was a container within the vehicle at the time of the arrest, and Edwards' attempt to remove it did not change its status.

On appeal to the Supreme Court of the State of South Dakota, the court affirmed the conviction, holding that the search of Edwards' purse was lawful under the automobile exception, as probable cause to search the vehicle extended to all containers within it, including the personal belongings of passengers. 

USE OF FORCE CASES

**Jackson-Gibson v. Beasley**
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
October 15, 2024
Docket: 23-2020

*LEO LAW Topics 8-2, 8-4**, 9-4**: Applying the Graham factors, qualified immunity was denied where a reasonable jury could find an officer’s use of Taser on a person who was non-threatening and not resisting arrest.*

On a Friday night, Lamonte Jackson-Gibson celebrated his birthday with four friends, including his girlfriend, Toriel Dixon, in Detroit, Michigan. After midnight, the group took the celebration to Detroit’s Greektown neighborhood. There, they stopped on the sidewalk to listen to street musicians. Sergeant Reginald Beasley, accompanied by several other police officers, engaged the group and told them to “keep that shit moving.” Jackson-Gibson questioned Sgt. Beasley as to why he needed to leave, and the situation escalated. After a series of mostly nonviolent verbal exchanges, with some pushing and pulling thrown into the mix, Sgt. Beasley tased Jackson-Gibson in his back while he embraced his girlfriend, Dixon. Jackson-Gibson and Dixon were then arrested and charged with obstructing or resisting a police officer, and Jackson-Gibson was also charged with disturbing the peace. A jury acquitted them of all charges, and they brought claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against Sgt. Beasley for excessive force and wrongful arrest.

At the district court, Sgt. Beasley moved for summary judgment on the excessive-force claims, arguing for qualified immunity, but did not move for summary judgment on the wrongful arrest claims. The district court granted summary judgment on Dixon’s excessive-force claim but denied it for Jackson-Gibson’s excessive-force claim. Sgt. Beasley’s motion to reconsider was also denied.  

On interlocutory appeal, the Sixth Circuit dismissed Sgt. Beasley’s challenge to the wrongful-arrest claims for lack of jurisdiction, as he did not seek qualified immunity for those claims in the lower court. The court affirmed the district court’s denial of qualified immunity on Jackson-Gibson’s excessive-force claim. The court held that a reasonable jury could find that Sgt. Beasley’s use of a taser was objectively unreasonable, as Jackson-Gibson’s alleged crimes were not severe, he did not pose an immediate threat, and he was not actively resisting arrest. The court also held that the right to be free from excessive force when not actively resisting was clearly established by 2019.

**Corieli**** v. Snyder**
US Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
October 18, 2024
Docket: 23-12746 

*LEO LAW Topic 8-4: Single use of a Taser against a suspect who actively resisted and attempted to flee was objectively reasonable under the Graham Factors.*

Anthony Coriell was a passenger in a vehicle missing a license plate. Douglasville police officer Dominic Snyder pulled the car over and asked for identification from the occupants. Rather than providing identification, Coriell repeatedly gave Snyder a fake name. When asked to exit the vehicle, Coriell pushed Snyder and attempted to flee. In response, Snyder fired his taser and deployed a single charge to stop Coriell's flight. Coriell fell headfirst onto the asphalt and suffered multiple injuries, including a head injury that required hospitalization.

Coriell filed against Snyder and the City, alleging claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Georgia law for the use of excessive force. The district court granted summary judgment to Snyder, concluding that he was entitled to qualified immunity on the § 1983 claim because his use of force was reasonable under a totality of the circumstances. The district court also granted summary judgment to Snyder on the state-law claims and to the city on the § 1983 claim against it. 

On appeal to the Eleventh Circuit, applying the Graham factors, the court held that Snyder's single use of the taser was objectively reasonable under the circumstances. The following facts supported their conclusion: Coriell was both actively resisting arrest and attempting to evade arrest by flight. Upon exiting the vehicle, Coriell pushed Snyder away and resisted Snyder's attempts to restrain him. He then fled on foot. Snyder used his taser to halt Coriell's attempted flight. He did not use more force than was necessary. He deployed “a single use of the taser gun causing a one-time shocking,” which was proportionate to the need to stop Coriell from fleeing arrest. Moreover, the amount of force was reasonable because, “where a suspect appears ... uncooperative, use of a taser might be preferable to a physical struggle” that could have led to further harm to the officer or the suspect. Further supporting the proportionality of the force applied is the fact that Snyder applied no additional force after Coriell stopped resisting arrest and complied with officer instructions.
