---
source: "BF 21APR2023.docx"
tags:
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
---

BF 21APR2023

United States v. Howard

Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Opinion Date: April 19, 2023

Terry Stop and Consent Search

The First Circuit affirmed the judgment of the district court convicting Defendant of possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance, holding that the district court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress drug evidence.

Defendant was a passenger in a single-vehicle car accident on the Maine Turnpike. Suspicion that the vehicle and/or its occupants were transporting drugs Maine police officers searched Defendant's bag and discovered narcotics. Defendant filed a motion to suppress, arguing that the evidence was obtain in violation of her Fourth Amendment rights. The district court denied the motion, after which Defendant conditionally pleaded guilty. The First Circuit affirmed, holding that Defendant's arguments for suppression failed.

United States v. Thomas

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit

Docket: 21-3169

Opinion Date: April 19, 2023

Judge: Frank Hoover Easterbrook

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Thomas was wanted by Indiana officials and warrants had been issued for his arrest. Thomas obtained fake identification documents, including one issued by North Carolina under the name “Alredius”. Using that fictitious identity, Thomas leased an Atlanta condominium. Federal officials arrested him outside the building. Thomas’s landlord stated that she had rented the unit to
“Alredius Frieson.” With the landlord’s consent, officers searched the condo, finding drugs, drug paraphernalia, and cell phones. After obtaining warrants to search the phones, the officers discovered evidence that Thomas was trafficking methamphetamine. Charged under 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(A), 846, Thomas unsuccessfully moved to suppress the evidence.

The Seventh Circuit reversed. A tenant lawfully may exclude others, even when the landlord consents to a search. Using an alias to sign a lease does not deprive a tenant of a legitimate expectation of privacy. A Georgia tenant who deceives or even defrauds a landlord is entitled to retain possession of the residence until the landlord has provided notice and obtained a judicial order. Thomas’s landlord could not summarily terminate his protections without violating Georgia law, nor could she consent to a warrantless search of his condo. A breach of a rental agreement does not automatically deprive the breaching party of a legitimate expectation of privacy.

United States v. Larry Rederick

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-1787

Opinion Date: April 20, 2023

Judge: BENTON

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant moved to suppress evidence from a traffic stop, claiming that the officers unconstitutionally delayed it to conduct a drug-dog search and that the dog’s alert did not provide probable cause to search. The district court denied most of the motion. A jury convicted Defendant for possession of 50 grams or more of methamphetamine with intent to distribute and conspiracy to distribute 500 grams or more of a mixture and substance containing meth. Defendant appealed the denial of the motion to suppress.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court held that the Troopers here had reasonable suspicion before stopping Defendant, which existed throughout the stop. Only 27 minutes passed from the stop until the dog’s alert. This delay did not violate the Fourth Amendment because the Troopers acted diligently to pursue the mission of the stop: to assist with the investigation of Defendant’s drug-related activity. Further, the court held that based on the totality of the circumstances at the scene of the stop, the dog’s alert provided probable cause to search the vehicles.

Woods v. State

Court: Wyoming Supreme Court

Citation: 2023 WY 32

Opinion Date: April 17, 2023

Judge: Boomgaarden

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court reversed Defendant's conviction for misdemeanor interference with a peace officer stemming from his act of resisting when police officers entered his home without a warrant to arrest him for a misdemeanor crime, holding that, under the circumstances of this case, Defendant's conviction could not stand.

On appeal, Defendant argued that the officers' warrantless entry into his home was unlawful, and therefore, the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress. The Supreme Court reversed, holding (1) the officers in this case were not "engaged in the lawful performance" of their official duties when they entered Defendant's home without a warrant, as required to convict him under Wyo. Stat. Ann. 6-5-204(a); and (2) because the officers' warrantless entry into Defendant's home was per se unreasonable, the warrantless entry into Defendant's home to execute a warrantless arrest violated Defendant's rights under the Fourth Amendment.

Dillard Putman v. Quentin Harris

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit

Docket: 22-1360

Opinion Date: April 19, 2023

Judge: DIAZ

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law

Virginia police responded to a 911 call seeking help to locate Plaintiff, who they were told was potentially armed and suicidal. After failing to find Plaintiff in his house, two officers and a K-9 searched the surrounding woods. The dog quickly caught Plaintiff’s scent, leading officers to find him lying in a shallow ditch. Bodycam footage shows the subsequent heated encounter, with officers demanding Plaintiff turn around and Plaintiff angrily ordering them to leave. After a two-minute impasse, an officer twice released the dog, who bit Plaintiff and caused a severe injury. The officers ultimately discovered Plaintiff didn’t have a gun. Plaintiff sued under state law and 42 U.S.C. Section 1983, alleging, among other things, violations of his Fourth Amendment rights. The district court denied the K-9 officer’s summary-judgment motion asserting qualified immunity, holding that the undisputed facts didn’t establish whether the officer had a reasonable belief that Plaintiff was armed.

The Fourth Circuit reversed the district court’s denial of qualified immunity to the K-9 officer on the excessive-force count and remanded with instructions that the court enters judgment for him on that count. The court explained that while the bodycam video alone may not illuminate whether the officer had a reasonable belief that Plaintiff was armed, the full record clarifies that this assumption was reasonable. Given that, the officer’s use of his dog to seize Plaintiff didn’t violate the Fourth Amendment.

Henry Howe v. Steven Gilpin

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit

Docket: 22-1860

Opinion Date: April 20, 2023

Judge: LOKEN

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law

Plaintiff filed a Section 1983 lawsuit against several defendants, including agents of the Grand Forks Narcotics Task Force (“GFNTF”). Plaintiff alleged two Fourth Amendment violations: (I) the warrant was based upon deliberate falsehood or reckless disregard for the truth -- the use of the informant to develop and generate false evidence incorporated in an affidavit; and (ii) Defendants deprived Plaintiff of a preliminary hearing at which Plaintiff would have been discharged because the warrant was not supported by probable cause. Plaintiff appealed the grant of summary judgment dismissing these claims.

The Eighth Circuit affirmed. The court agreed with the district court that the affidavit provided probable cause to arrest Plaintiff, even if corrected to include the information Plaintiff alleged was recklessly omitted. The court explained that there is no evidence any of the defendants knew about the false “murder-for-hire” allegations when the warrant affidavit was submitted. An agent does not “violate a clearly established constitutional right by omitting information from a warrant application that he does not actually know, even if the reason is his own reckless investigation.” As Plaintiff’s subsequent, lengthy investigation of the informant makes clear, minimal further investigation into the informant’s criminal history would not have exonerated Plaintiff.
