---
source: "43 BF 22OCT2021.docx"
tags:
  - Vehicle-Containment
  - Probable-Cause
  - Parole-Search
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - Vehicle-Stop
  - Use-of-Third-Party-GPS-data
  - Traffic-Stop
  - Extended-Stop-with-RS
  - Terry-Frisk
  - Consent-Search
  - Seizure-of-a-person
---

43 BF 22OCT2021

City of Tahlequah v. Bond
Court: US Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 18, 2021

Rollice’s ex-wife called 911. Rollice was in her garage, intoxicated, and would not leave. Three officers responded to the call and spoke with Rollice through the garage’s doorway. Rollice began fidgeting with something in his hands; he appeared nervous. Rollice refused a request for a pat-down. Police body-camera video captured Rollice conversing with the officers as he turned around and walked toward the back of the garage where his tools were hanging. No officer was within six feet of Rollice. The officers state that they ordered Rollice to stop. Rollice kept walking, grabbed a hammer, and turned toward the officers, grasping the hammer's handle with both hands and pulling it up to shoulder level. The officers backed up, drawing their guns. They yelled at Rollice to drop the hammer. Rollice took steps toward Officer Girdner, raised the hammer behind his head, and took a stance as if he was about to throw the hammer or charge at the officers. Two officers fired their weapons, killing Rollice. Rollice’s estate filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983. The Supreme Court reversed the Tenth Circuit. The officers did not violate any clearly established law and are shielded by qualified immunity. None of the decisions cited by the Tenth Circuit established that the officers’ conduct was unlawful. Officers engaged in a conversation with Rollice, followed him into a garage at a distance, and did not yell until after he picked up a hammer. Precedent did not “clearly establish” that their conduct was reckless or that their ultimate use of force was unlawful.

Rivas-Villegas v. Cortesluna
Court: US Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 18, 2021

Union City, California officer Rivas-Villegas responded to a 911 call reporting that a woman and her children were barricaded in a room for fear that Cortesluna, the woman’s boyfriend, was going to hurt them. After confirming that the family had no means of escape, Rivas-Villegas and other officers commanded Cortesluna outside and onto the ground. Officers saw a knife in Cortesluna’s pocket. While Rivas-Villegas and another officer were removing the knife and handcuffing Cortesluna, Rivas-Villegas briefly placed his knee on the side of Cortesluna’s back. Cortesluna sued under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging excessive force. The Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit. Rivas-Villegas is entitled to qualified immunity because he did not violate clearly established law. Even assuming that controlling Circuit precedent clearly established the law for purposes of section 1983, Ninth Circuit precedent did not give Rivas-Villegas fair notice that he was using excessive force. This is not an obvious case. The officers, in this case, were responding to a serious alleged incident of domestic violence possibly involving a chainsaw and Cortesluna had a knife protruding from his pocket for which he had just previously appeared to reach. Cortesluna does not dispute, that Rivas-Villegas placed his knee on Cortesluna for no more than eight seconds and only on the side of his back near the knife that officers were in the process of retrieving.

United States v. Gonzalez
Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Opinion Date: October 20, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Vehicle Containment, Probable Cause

Summary: Probable cause existed for de facto arrest when officers forcibly detained vehicle and occupants (vehicle detainment issue moot).

The First Circuit affirmed the judgment of the district court convicting Defendant of three drug trafficking offenses after law enforcement officers discovered cocaine and heroin inside of his vehicle, holding that the district court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress. In his motion to suppress, Defendant argued that the officers stopped his vehicle without reasonable suspicion, in violation of the Fourth Amendment, and therefore, the drugs found inside of the vehicle were inadmissible as evidence. The district court denied Defendant's motion to suppress. The First Circuit affirmed, holding that the officers had probable cause to arrest Defendant when they conducted the vehicle containment in this case.

United States v. Wood
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Opinion Date: October 21, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Parole Search

Summary: Warrantless search of cellphone of parolee reasonable under diminished expectation of privacy.

Wood served time in Indiana state prison for methamphetamine‐related offenses. He was released on parole, subject to conditions, including that he was subject to "reasonable" searches, Wood violated his parole by failing to report to his supervising officer. The Parole Board issued an arrest warrant. Agents arrested Wood at his home. Agent Gentry secured Wood with wrist restraints, conducted a frisk search, and noticed Wood repeatedly turning toward his cellphone, which was lying nearby. Gentry picked up the cellphone and handed it to Agent Rains. Wood demanded that his cellphone be turned off and began to physically resist Gentry. Rains felt something “lumpy” on the back of Wood’s cellphone, removed the back cover, and found a packet of a substance which Rains believed to be methamphetamine. Wood admitted the substance was methamphetamine. A later search of the home revealed syringes and other drug paraphernalia. Seven days after Wood’s arrest, an Indiana Department of Correction investigator performed a warrantless search of Wood’s cellphone, which revealed child pornography. The investigator forwarded the information to the FBI, which obtained a search‐and‐seizure warrant for Wood’s cellphone and its contents. Charged under 18 U.S.C. 2252(a)(2), (a)(4)(B), Wood unsuccessfully moved to suppress the data extracted from his cellphone. The Seventh Circuit affirmed. Given Wood’s diminished expectation of privacy and Indiana’s strong governmental interests, the search of Wood’s cellphone was reasonable.

United States v. Martin
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: October 18, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Reasonable Suspicion, Vehicle Stop, Use of Third-Party GPS data

Summary:

After panel rehearing, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motions to suppress and his objection to application of the career criminal enhancement in USSG 4B1.1(a). Defendant robbed a Sprint Wireless Express store at gunpoint, and then left with a GPS tracker. The court concluded that the police had at least reasonable suspicion to stop the vehicle where, considering the tight window of opportunity officers have to locate a fleeing suspect, it was reasonable for police to rely on third-party GPS data. Furthermore, other factors also supported the officers' suspicion, such as the store employee's description of the vehicle and the unusual behavior of the vehicle's occupants. Therefore, the totality of the circumstances gave police at least reasonable suspicion that criminal activity was afoot, and thus stopping the vehicle to investigate that suspicion comported with the Fourth Amendment. The court also concluded that any error in denying as moot defendant's objection to evidence of a show-up was harmless after the government stated it did not intend to use the evidence at trial. Finally, the court concluded that the district court did not err in imposing the career offender enhancement where Illinois armed robbery qualifies as generic robbery under the enumerated offense clause of section 4B1.2(a)(2).

State v. Taylor
Court: Minnesota Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 13, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Traffic Stop, Extended Stop with RS

Summary: Questions about consuming alcoholic beverages not a Rodriguez violation where open case was observed in car during traffic stop. 

The Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the court of appeals holding that a law enforcement officer lawfully expanded the scope of the underlying traffic stop in this case, holding the court of appeals did not err. Defendant was convicted of first-degree driving while impaired and possessing an opened bottle or receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage. On appeal, Defendant argued that the district court erred by denying his motion to suppress evidence because the officer impermissibly expanded the scope of the underlying traffic stop by asking Defendant if he had consumed any beer from the open case in his vehicle. The court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the circumstances known to the officer and the legitimate inferences to be drawn from them raised a reasonable articulable suspicion of other criminal activity sufficient to expand the scope of the traffic stop.

State v. Laster
Court: Montana Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 19, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Terry Frisk, Consent Search

Summary: Terry Frisk unlawful, but evidence found during subsequent consensual search was admissible.

The Supreme Court affirmed in part and reversed in part the judgment of the district court denying Defendant's motion to suppress illegal drug evidence seized as a result of a protective pat-down search for weapons and in a subsequent search of his vehicle, holding that the district court erred in concluding that the protective pat-down search of Defendant was justified. Specifically, the Supreme Court held (1) the district court erroneously held that the pat-down search of Defendant was justified under Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S. 1 (1968) and Mont. Code Ann. 46-5-401(2)(b), whether incident to a valid Terry investigative stop or analogous community caretaker doctrine stop, but did not err in concluding that the exclusionary rule did not apply to the illegal drug evidence seized in the warrantless pat-down and vehicle searches at issue; and (2) therefore, the district court erred in denying Defendant's motion to suppress evidence found in his coat pocket as a result of the initial pat-down search but correctly denied Defendant's motion to suppress evidence found in the subsequent consent search of his vehicle.

State v. Pham
Court: Montana Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 19, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Seizure of a person

Summary: Encounter at gas pump constituted an unlawful seizure because it lacked particularized suspicion of criminal activity, tainting subsequent consent to search.

The Supreme Court reversed the order of the district court denying Defendant's motion to suppress based on its determination that Defendant had not been seized, holding that the district court clearly erred when it concluded that Defendant was not seized. Defendant was found guilty of felony possession with intent to distribute. The district court order denying Defendant's motion to suppress concluded that Defendant voluntarily engaged with the law enforcement officer and was not seized because a reasonable person would have felt free to disengage and leave. Further, the order concluded that Defendant validly consented to the officer searching his vehicle. The Supreme Court reversed, holding (1) Defendant was seized in this case; and (2) the officer did not have particularized suspicion to justify the seizure.
