---
source: "29 BF 16JUL2021.docx"
tags:
  - Search
  - reasonable-expectation-of-privacy
  - REP
  - FedEx
  - Packages
  - deceased-person
  - Probable-Cause
  - Warrant
  - Parole-Search
  - Miranda
  - Custody-for-Miranda
  - Consent-search-of-laptop
  - government-action
  - pole-cameras
  - mosaic
  - Probable-Cause
  - Warrant
  - Warrantless-entry-into-dwelling
  - Emergency-exigency
  - Monell-Liability
  - Municipal-Liability
  - Use-of-Force
  - Takedown
  - Active-Resistance
---

29 BF 16JUL2021

United States v. Rose   4thCIR   9JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Search, reasonable expectation of privacy, REP, FedEx, Packages, deceased person

Defendant was convicted by a jury of conspiracy to possess with intent to distribute five kilograms or more of cocaine and possession with intent to distribute 500 grams or more of cocaine. Defendant was sentenced by the district court to 420-months in prison and a five-year term of supervised release. The Fourth Circuit concluded that the district court did not err in denying the suppression motion because, at the time the searches were conducted, defendant did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the two FedEx packages that were addressed to a deceased person. The court explained that defendant did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the packages addressed to the deceased because, at the time of the searches, there were no objective indicia that defendant owned, possessed, or exercised control over the packages. The court also rejected defendant's arguments regarding the procedural and substantive reasonableness of his sentence. In this case, the district court did err by applying the two-level leadership enhancement under USSG 3B1.1(c) and, even if the district court had erred, the error was harmless. Furthermore, the district court's comments at sentencing concerned defendant's actions and behaviors and did not establish that the district court was biased. Finally, the district court took care in addressing the 18 U.S.C. 3553(a) sentencing factors and defendant failed to rebut the presumption that his sentence is substantively reasonable.

United States v. James   8thCIR   9JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Probable Cause, Warrant

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress in an action where defendant was convicted of robbing or attempting to rob multiple stores around the Twin Cities. Law enforcement identified defendant by searching cellular-tower records, which showed that defendant's cell phone was at or near at least four of the robberies. In this case, the affidavits for the search warrants explained why there was a fair probability that the cellular-tower records would identify the robber. Considered in their totality, the court concluded that the facts provided a substantial basis to conclude that probable cause existed. The court explained that the judges knew from the affidavits that the robberies were connected by a common modus operandi; that the robber likely carried a cell phone, even if he did not use it during the robberies; and that comparing the numbers from cellular-tower records could reveal his true identity. Furthermore, the search warrants were constrained both geographically and temporally.

United States v. Braggs   2ndCIR   13JUL2021   

> **Areas of Law:** Parole Search

The Second Circuit vacated the district court's order granting defendant's motion to suppress evidence found during a search of his house. Defendant was on parole at the time of the search where parole officers were tipped by an anonymous informant that defendant may have been in possession of guns. During the search, the officers found multiple firearms, a box of ammunition, and illegal narcotics. The district court concluded that the search violated defendant's Fourth Amendment rights because it was executed without reasonable suspicion. However, the court concluded that, under the Special Needs Doctrine jurisprudence, the parole search was proper because it was reasonably related to the parole officers' duties. The court remanded for further proceedings.

United States v. Michalik   5thCIR   18JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Miranda, Custody for Miranda, Consent search of laptop

The Fifth Circuit affirmed defendant's conviction for possessing child pornography. The court concluded that the district court did not err in denying defendant's motion to suppress evidence of his statements to HSI agents and the evidence from his laptop. The court weighed the totality of the circumstances and concluded that defendant was not in custody at the time he made the statements and thus Miranda warnings were not necessary. The court also weighed the factors for determining whether a consent to a search was voluntary and concluded that the district court did not err in determining that defendant's consent to the search of his laptop was voluntary. 

Goodloe v. Brannon   7thCIR   12JUL2021
Tags: 

Chicago officers responded to a 911 call and found Jones bleeding from a gunshot wound. Jones stated, “Damon shot me” and that Damon was wearing a “black hoodie.” About 90 seconds later, officers encountered Damon Goodloe, wearing a black hoodie but unarmed. They took Goodloe to the scene, where Jones stated, “he’s the one that shot me.” Jones died at a hospital. The prosecution introduced Jones’s statements to the officers. Goodloe’s hands tested positive for gunshot residue. Lovett testified that she saw Goodloe (whom she knew) and another man, both in black hoodies, heard several gunshots but ducked before she could see who fired a gun, called 911, and identified Goodloe in a line-up. Loggins testified that he was purchasing cocaine from Jones when he observed two men in black hoodies. When the shots were fired, he fled. A jury convicted Goodloe of first-degree murder without finding that he personally discharged a firearm. The Seventh Circuit affirmed the denial of Goodloe’s habeas petition, first upholding the admission of Jones’s identification of Goodloe. Statements are nontestimonial when made during police interrogation under circumstances objectively indicating that the primary purpose of the interrogation is to meet an ongoing emergency. The state appellate court did not unreasonably apply Supreme Court precedent in concluding that the emergency was ongoing when Goodloe was taken to the ambulance in handcuffs. Counsel was not ineffective for failing to investigate witnesses who could have provided an innocent explanation for Goodloe's presence near the shooting; their testimony was unlikely to create a reasonable probability of a different result.

United States v. Bebris   7thCIR   15JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** government action

Bebris sent child pornography over Facebook’s private user-to-user messaging system. Facebook licenses a “hashing” image recognition technology, PhotoDNA, developed by Microsoft. PhotoDNA provides the capability to scan images uploaded onto a company’s platform and compares the “hash” (or essence) of a photo with a database of known images of child pornography. Three of Bebris’s messages were flagged by PhotoDNA. Facebook employees reviewed the images and reported them to the CyberTipline of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, as required by 18 U.S.C. 2258A(a), which then reported the images to Wisconsin law enforcement. Those officials obtained a warrant and searched Bebris’s residence, where they found a computer containing numerous child pornography files. Bebris, charged federally with possessing and distributing child pornography., argued that the evidence should be suppressed, contending that Facebook took on the role of a government agent (subject to Fourth Amendment requirements) by monitoring its platform for child pornography and reporting that content. The district court denied his Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 17(a) subpoena seeking pre-trial testimony from a Facebook employee with knowledge of Facebook’s use of PhotoDNA. The Seventh Circuit affirmed his conviction. The subpoena sought cumulative testimony. The record included a written declaration from Microsoft and Facebook and live testimony from an executive at NCMEC, which administers the federal reporting system. Facebook did not act as a government agent in this case.

United States v. Tuggle    7thCIR   14JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** pole cameras, mosaic

In 2013-2016, law enforcement investigated a large methamphetamine distribution conspiracy, installing three cameras on utility poles on public property that viewed Tuggle’s home and a shed owned by Tuggle’s coconspirator, Vaultonburg. The cameras recorded around the clock. Rudimentary lighting technology improved the quality of overnight footage; agents could remotely zoom, pan, and tilt the cameras and review the camera footage in real-time or later. Officers tallied over 100 instances of what they suspected were deliveries of methamphetamine to Tuggle’s residence. After these alleged “drops,” different individuals would arrive, enter the home, and purportedly buy methamphetamine. Several witnesses corroborated these activities. Relying heavily on the video evidence, officers secured and executed search warrants on several locations, including Tuggle’s house. After the denial of his motions to suppress, Tuggle pled guilty under 21 U.S.C. 841(a)(1) and (b)(1)(A) to conspiring to distribute, and possess with intent to distribute, at least 50 grams of methamphetamine and at least 500 grams of a mixture containing methamphetamine, and 21 U.S.C. 856(a)(1) for maintaining a drug-involved premises. The Seventh Circuit affirmed. The government used commonplace technology, located where officers were lawfully entitled to be, and captured events observable to any ordinary passerby; it did not invade an expectation of privacy that society would be prepared to accept as reasonable. The prolonged, uninterrupted use of pole cameras did not constitute a Fourth Amendment search.

United States v. Evans   8thCIR   12JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Probable Cause, Warrant

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress, concluding that the warrant affidavit contained sufficient corroborated information to support a fair probability that evidence of a crime would be found at defendant's house. In this case, the detective's corroboration, combined with the specificity of the anonymous source's information and physical presence before the officer and issuing judge, sufficiently established probable cause for the search warrant. The court also concluded that, because the affidavit underlying the search warrant for defendant's residence also supported probable cause to detain and arrest him, the officers did not need separate indicia of criminal activity occurring at the time of the arrest to make the arrest.

Gaetjens v. Winnebago County   7thCIR   13JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Warrantless entry into dwelling, Emergency exigency

Gaetjens bred cats in her Loves Park home.. Her doctor told her to go to the hospital because of high blood pressure. Later that day, the doctor couldn’t locate Gaetjens and phoned Eads, Gaetjens’s neighbor. Eads could not locate Gaetjens. The next day, Gaetjens was still missing. Eads called the police, stating that Gaetjens might be experiencing a medical emergency. Officers went to Gaetjens’s home but could not see anyone inside. They saw packages on the porch, untended garbage, and a full mailbox. . Eads provided a key. The police went into the home but immediately left because of intense odors, "urine, feces, and maybe a decomposing body." The police called the Fire Department to enter with breathing devices. The Fire Chief temporarily condemned the home as not fit for habitation. Firefighters went inside to look for Gaetjens but found 37 cats. They summoned Animal Services to round up the cats because Gaetjens was not allowed inside the condemned house. The cats were impounded for nine days. Four cats died. Gaetjens, who had been in the hospital, sued under section 1983. The Seventh Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of the defendants. The Fourth Amendment ordinarily prohibits such conduct without a warrant but emergencies breed exceptions. The defendants had reason to believe that Gaetjens was experiencing a medical emergency and found her home so noxious that it posed a public safety risk.

USE OF FORCE

McReynolds v. Schmidli   8thCIR   13JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Monell Liability, Municipal Liability, Use of Force, Takedown, Active Resistance

After plaintiff sustained significant injuries during the course of an arrest on domestic violence and related charges, he filed suit against the arresting officers, city officials, and the City of Independence, alleging violations of his constitutional rights. The district court granted summary judgment to the defendants on all claims. The Eighth Circuit concluded that the district court erred in granting qualified immunity to Defendant Schmidli; plaintiff has shown a violation of the constitutional right to be free from excessive force by law enforcement; and a reasonable officer would have had fair warning that, at the time, he could not violently takedown a person who was not threatening anyone, not actively resisting arrest, and not attempting to flee. However, the court concluded that Defendant Gentile was entitled to qualified immunity because there was insufficient evidence that he used excessive force or significantly contributed to the driving force that caused the injury. The court also concluded that the defendant officers are entitled to summary judgment on the substantive due process claim where plaintiff failed to provide any evidence that any inaccuracy in the officers' reports was fabricated in order to frame him. Furthermore, there is no reasonable inference drawn from plaintiff's version of the facts that would allow a finder of fact to conclude that Schmidli and Gentile deliberately lied with the intention of framing him. Finally, the City was entitled to summary judgment on plaintiff's Monell claim where plaintiff failed to establish the City had an unofficial custom authorizing officers to use excessive force.
