---
source: "27 BF 2JUL2021.docx"
tags:
  - Use-of-Force
  - Probation-Search
  - Use-of-Force
  - Handcuffs
  - Deliberate-Indifference
  - Handcuffing-Test
  - Automobile-Exception
  - Child-pornography
  - cellphone-seizure
  - Automobile-exception
  - mobility
  - probable-cause
  - Franks-hearing
  - automobile-exception
  - container
  - probable-cause
  - Probable-Cause
  - Warrant
  - Miranda
  - Custody
  - Use-of-Force
  - Deadly-Force
  - Use-of-Vehicle-as-a-weapon
  - Use-of-Force
  - First-Amendment-Retaliation
  - Qualified-Immunity
  - Excessive-Force
  - Seizure
  - No-Physical-Force
  - Use-of-Force
  - Spike-Strips
  - Qualified-Immunity
---

BF 2 JULY 2021

Lombardo v. St. Louis   USSC   28JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force

Lombardo v. St. Louis, 594 U.S. ___ (2021)
Officers arrested Gilbert for trespassing, took him to the St. Louis Metropolitan Police Department, and placed him in a holding cell. An officer saw Gilbert tie a piece of clothing around the cell bars and put it around his neck, in an apparent suicide attempt. Three officers entered Gilbert’s cell, eventually brought Gilbert to a kneeling position over a concrete bench, and handcuffed his arms behind his back. Gilbert kicked the officers and hit his head on the bench. They shackled his legs. Six officers moved Gilbert to a prone position, face down on the floor. Three officers held Gilbert down at the shoulders, biceps, and legs; at least one placed pressure on Gilbert’s back and torso. Gilbert tried to raise his chest, saying, “'It hurts. Stop.’” After 15 minutes of struggling, Gilbert’s breathing became abnormal; he stopped moving. The officers rolled Gilbert onto his back and found no pulse; they performed chest compressions and rescue breathing. An ambulance transported Gilbert to the hospital, where he was pronounced dead. In an “excessive force” suit, the Eighth Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of the officers. The Supreme Court vacated. The excessive force inquiry requires careful attention to the facts and circumstances of each particular case, including the relationship between the need for the use of force and the amount of force used; the extent of the plaintiff’s injury; any effort by the officer to limit the amount of force; the severity of the underlying security problem; the threat reasonably perceived by the officer; and whether the plaintiff was actively resisting. Here, the court either failed to analyze or found insignificant, details such as that Gilbert was already handcuffed and shackled when placed in the prone position, that officers kept him in that position for 15 minutes, and that St. Louis instructs its officers that pressing down on the back of a prone subject can cause suffocation. The lower court’s opinion could be read to treat Gilbert’s “ongoing resistance” as controlling as a matter of law. Such a per se rule would contravene the careful, context-specific analysis required by precedent.

United States v. Lindsey   1stCIR   29JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Probation Search

The First Circuit affirmed Defendant's conviction of possession with intent to distribute cocaine, fentanyl, and methamphetamines, holding that Defendant's challenges on appeal were unavailing. During a probation compliance check in Defendant's apartment state probation officers discovered a black case containing illegal narcotics. The police then obtained and executed a warrant to search Defendant's apartment and his two cellphones for evidence of drug dealing. On appeal, Defendant argued, among other things, that there was no probable cause to search his cellphones and that the warrant did not adequately specify which files on the phones would be searched. The First Circuit affirmed, holding (1) the trial court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress evidence recovered from the cellphones; (2) there was sufficient evidence to support the convictions; and (3) Defendant was not entitled to relief on his remaining allegations of error.

Hughey v. Easlick   6thCIR   28JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, Handcuffs, Deliberate Indifference, Handcuffing Test

Hughey, speeding, passed Michigan State Trooper Easlick, who flipped on his dashcam and stopped Hughey. Hughey’s car was uninsured and unregistered and there was an outstanding warrant for Hughey’s failure to appear. Easlick relayed that Hughey needed to pay the $400 bond on her warrant in cash immediately or he would have to take her to the courthouse. Hughey did not resist arrest. Easlick handcuffed Hughey’s hands behind her back and placed her in his car. Hughey expressed suicidal thoughts, so Easlick took her to the hospital. Hughey alleges that Easlick twisted her arm behind her back as he handcuffed her and did not check for tightness, that her shoulder hurt “[a]lmost immediately,” and that after Easlick removed the handcuffs at the hospital, a nurse observed “rings around [Hughey’s] wrists.” No part of the handcuffing is visible in the dashcam footage. Hughey sued Easlick for excessive force and deliberate indifference under 42 U.S.C. 1983. The district court granted Easlick summary judgment. The Sixth Circuit reversed. Hughey created a genuine dispute of material fact about whether Easlick violated her clearly established constitutional right to be free from excessive force. Her allegations are enough to satisfy the “handcuffing test” at summary judgment. The dashcam audio does not foreclose the possibility that Hughey repeatedly complained about pain. A plethora of excessive-force handcuffing cases put Easlick on notice that the way that he yanked Hughey’s arm, placed overly tight handcuffs, and ignored her complaints violated her right to be free from excessive force.

United States v. Keck   8thCIR   29JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Automobile Exception, Child pornography, cellphone seizure

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress evidence of child pornography. In this case, defendant was convicted of five counts related to child pornography. The court concluded that, based on the facts, there was a fair probability that contraband or evidence of a crime would be found in defendant's vehicle and the agents had probable cause to search the vehicle. Because the automobile exception allowed the officers to search defendant's van and to seize any materials that they had probable cause to believe were contraband, seizing defendant's devices from his van was constitutional. The court also concluded that the evidence was sufficient to support defendant's conviction for attempted distribution of child pornography.

United States v. Short   8thCIR   29JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Automobile exception, mobility, probable cause, Franks hearing

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress evidence found in a warrantless search of his vehicle and subsequent search of his apartment. In this case, defendant conditionally pleaded guilty to possessing a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking crime in violation of 18 U.S.C. 924(c)(1)(A)(i). The court concluded that the officers indisputably had probable cause to search defendant's vehicle, and an easily repairable flat tire did not cause the vehicle to lose its inherent mobility. Therefore, the automobile exception applied and the district court properly denied the motion to suppress evidence resulting from the vehicle search. The court also concluded that the district court did not abuse its discretion in denying a Franks hearing where the court agreed with the district court that defendant's assertions failed to show that an investigator deliberately or recklessly omitted various details from his affidavit. Even if defendant had made a sufficient showing of deliberate or reckless omissions, the affidavit contained other information that was sufficient to support a finding of probable cause. Finally, the court concluded that defendant's sentence was not substantively unreasonable where the district court imposed an upward variance in light of the serious nature of the underlying events. In this case, the district court did not abuse its substantial sentencing discretion in weighing the 18 U.S.C. 3553(a) factors.

Idaho v. Maloney  IDSC   28JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** automobile exception, container, probable cause

Daisha Maloney appealed her conviction for possession of methamphetamine. An officer with the Twin Falls Police Department stopped the car Maloney was driving after determining that the vehicle’s registration had expired. During this traffic stop, the officer asked if Maloney would consent to a search of the vehicle. She agreed. As Maloney and her passenger exited the vehicle, Maloney took her purse with her. The search of the vehicle yielded a “one-hitter” marijuana pipe which contained residue. The officer told Maloney he needed to search her purse, which was no longer in the car, based on what had been discovered in the vehicle. The officer found two pipes containing white crystal residue. Maloney was thereafter charged with possession of methamphetamine. Maloney moved to suppress the evidence found in her purse, which the State opposed by arguing that the automobile exception to the warrant requirement applied. Maloney contended that the automobile exception only applied to containers inside the vehicle once probable cause arose, and did not extend to her purse, which was outside the vehicle when the officers found the marijuana pipe. The district court agreed with the State that the automobile exception applied and denied Maloney’s motion. Maloney then entered a conditional guilty plea reserving her ability to appeal the suppression issue, and after judgment was entered, she filed a timely appeal. The Idaho Supreme Court reversed: once probable cause develops such that the automobile exception applies, officers may search accordingly. However, unless probable cause to search a vehicle has developed before a container is removed from the vehicle, an officer may not rely on the automobile exception to search that container. Because the State has relied exclusively on the automobile exception to justify the search of Maloney’s purse, the district court erred in denying Maloney’s motion to suppress.

State v. Resiner   RISC   30JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Probable Cause, Warrant

The Supreme Court vacated the judgment of the superior court finding Defendant guilty of possession of child pornography and sentencing him to a suspended term of incarceration, with probation, and ordering him to meet special conditions of probation and to register as a sex offender, holding that there was no substantial basis for determining that probable cause existed in this case. On appeal, Defendant argued, among other things, that the superior court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence that was seized from his home on the grounds that there was no probable cause to support the issuance of a search warrant. The Supreme Court agreed and vacated Defendant's convictions, holding that there was no substantial basis for determining that probable cause existed in this case based upon the language of the affidavit.

Wexler v. Texas   TXCCA   30JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Miranda, Custody

Police were told that the house at 318 Avenue A in South Houston was a site of drug dealing. During a week of surveillance, narcotics K-9 officers arrested four people leaving the house in possession of methamphetamine, and police got a warrant to search the house. While uniformed officers in marked police cars blocked both ends of the street, 20 to 25 HROU officers surrounded the house, announced via loudspeaker from an armored vehicle that they had a search warrant, and directed occupants to exit the house. Appellant Suzanne Wexler came out and was detained by HROU officers and put in the back of a patrol car. While HROU did a protective sweep of the house, narcotics detective Jerome Hill questioned Appellant. Hill suspected that Appellant and someone named Jimmy were involved in distributing drugs, but Hill did not tell Appellant that she was a suspect, and he did not give her any warnings. Hill testified that he said, "We have a search warrant. Tell me where the narcotics are. It will save us some time doing the search. We're going to find it no matter what." Appellant told him that the drugs were Ain her bedroom in a dresser drawer. Appellant challenged the admissibility of that statement she made to police during the execution of a search warrant, claiming that the statement was a product of custodial interrogation. The court of appeals determined that Appellant made the statement before she was in custody, and it was properly admitted by the trial court. Finding no reversible error, the Texas Court of Criminal Appeals affirmed the trial court.

USE OF FORCE

Jackson v. Gautreaux   5thCIR   1JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, Deadly Force, Use of Vehicle as a weapon

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment based on qualified immunity to police officers who shot and killed Travis Stevenson. Stevenson was shot after unsuccessful efforts by police to deescalate a situation where Stevenson repeatedly slammed his vehicle into a police cruiser and a concrete pillar in front of an apartment building while yelling "Kill me!" The court concluded that the district court correctly held, in accordance with precedent, that plaintiffs' excessive-force claim fails as a matter of law. In this case, Stevenson was using his car as a weapon; Stevenson, like the drivers in the court's precedent, exhibited volatile behaviors that contributed to the officers justification in firing to prevent death or great bodily harm; and plaintiffs have not produced any evidence that suggests the officers might have had a reasonable alternative course of action. The court agreed with the district court that plaintiffs forfeited their failure-to-train claim against the sheriff by failing to plead it in their complaint and raising it only in response to the officers' motion for summary judgment.

Burbridge v. Biggins   8thCIR   25JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, First Amendment Retaliation, Qualified Immunity, Excessive Force

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of the officers' motion for summary judgment in a 42 U.S.C. 1983 action brought by plaintiff, who had been arrested at a protest, alleging violations of his First and Fourth Amendment rights and conspiracy to violate his rights, and under Missouri state law. Plaintiff and his wife were documentary filmmakers who were covering protests in downtown St. Louis, Missouri, following Officer Jason Stockley's acquittal of charges arising from the death of Anthony Lamar Smith. The court concluded that, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to plaintiff, a reasonable jury could conclude that Officer Biggins used excessive force during plaintiff's arrest, that he acted with an "actual intent to cause injury" to plaintiff, and that his use of excessive force was done in retaliation for plaintiff's First Amendment activity. Therefore, the district court did not err in denying summary judgment based on qualified immunity to Officer Biggins on plaintiff's First and Fourth Amendment claims, nor did the district court err in denying summary judgment based on official immunity to Officer Biggins on plaintiff's state law assault and battery claim. The court declined to consider the officers' argument concerning application of the intracorporate conspiracy doctrine because it was raised for the first time on appeal.

Steed v. Missouri State Highway Patrol   8thCIR   25JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Seizure, No Physical Force, Use of Force, Spike Strips, Qualified Immunity

After Jerome Goode led police on a twenty-five-mile car chase, the chase ended in his death and the deaths of passengers Lavoy Steed and Leon Haywood. Steed's next friend filed a 42 U.S.C. 1983 action against Missouri State Troopers Fowler and Ashby, alleging that the traffic stop that precipitated the chase and an attempt to halt Goode's vehicle with spike strips were unconstitutional seizures in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment in favor of the troopers, concluding that Trooper Fowler had probable cause to stop the vehicle where dashcam footage shows the vehicle going close to ninety miles per hour. Even assuming that the trooper misinterpreted the speed reading, he would still be entitled to qualified immunity because he had at least arguable probable cause to believe the vehicle was speeding. The court also concluded that the record clearly establishes that the troopers did not apply physical force by trying to use the spike strips, and thus there was no seizure.
