---
source: "24 BF 11JUN2021.docx"
tags:
  - Warrant-application
  - particularity
  - Reasonable-Suspicion-(Application-of-State-Law)
  - Warrant-sufficiency
  - Confidential-informant
  - collective-knowledge
  - Confidential-Informant
  - reliability
  - warrant-application
  - warrant-execution
  - scope-of-search
  - good-faith
  - cellphone-search
  - Show-Up-Identification
  - reasonable-suspicion
  - Terry-Stop-of-vehicle
  - GPS-data
  - warrant-execution
  - good-faith
  - First-Amendment
  - automobile-exception
  - reasonable-suspicion
  - terry-stop-of-a-vehicle
  - reasonable-suspicion
  - extended-traffic-stop
  - Rodriguez-Rule-Violation
---

24 BF 11JUN2021

United States v. Suggs   10thCIR   2JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Warrant application, particularity

This appeal stemmed from a road rage incident at the corner of a crosswalk in Colorado Springs: a pedestrian wanted to cross the street, the driver of a vehicle wanted to turn right. Words were exchanged, the driver pulled out a gun and took a shot at the pedestrian. The bullet didn’t strike anyone. The vehicle sped off, and the pedestrian called 911. Law enforcement focused their investigation on Defendant Perry Suggs. Warrants were issued, Defendant’s home was searched, and incriminating evidence was discovered. A federal grand jury charged Defendant with possession of a firearm and ammunition by a convicted felon. Before trial, Defendant moved to suppress the evidence found during sequential searches of his home and an SUV parked under his carport, arguing that the warrant to search his home violated the Fourth Amendment’s particularity requirement and that officers would not have found the evidence used against him but for the invalid warrant. The district court disagreed and denied the motion. Defendant appealed that decision. The Tenth Circuit determined the district court erred when it denied Defendant’s motion to suppress. “Because the residential search warrant failed to meet the Fourth Amendment’s particularity requirement and cannot be saved by the severability doctrine, we vacate the order denying Defendant’s suppression motion.” Yet the question remained whether the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule saved the incriminating evidence from suppression. The case was remanded for the district court to resolve underlying factual disputes and consider that remedial question in light of the Tenth Circuit’s holding.

United States v. Lao   7thCIR   4JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Reasonable Suspicion (Application of State Law)

During heavy snow, Lieutenant McAuly approached a car that was far off the roadway. Lao lowered the driver's window and stated that a tow truck was on its way. According to McAuly, Lao displayed nervousness and was acting as though he wanted McAuly to leave while speaking sharply to his passenger, Chang. Their driver’s licenses revealed extensive recent felony criminal histories. Both were under supervised release for methamphetamine convictions. Both consented to pat-down searches. McAuly discovered that under her shirt Chang was carrying a locked, portable gun safe. Chang denied both ownership of the safe and knowledge of its contents. Through the car windows, McAuly saw a razor blade and a piece of cardboard that he associated with dividing drugs. Wisconsin Act 79 authorizes an officer, without consent, a warrant, or probable cause, to search any property under the control of a person who is under court supervision if the officer has a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity. McAuly found the key, opened the gun safe, and found what was determined to be 75.6 grams of methamphetamine and a digital scale. A later search revealed a firearm and ammunition. After receiving Miranda warnings, Chang declared that everything in the safe belonged to her, although she was unable to describe its contents. Both were charged with possession with intent to distribute 50 grams or more of methamphetamine. Lao was also charged as a felon in possession of a firearm. The Seventh Circuit affirmed the denials of the defendants’ motion to suppress. Although the officer’s hunch alone was not sufficient justification for the seizure, other factors provided the reasonable suspicion necessary. Chang’s statements did not fall within any hearsay exception and could not be admitted if Chang chose to invoke her Fifth Amendment right not to testify.

United States v. Moore   6thCIR   7JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Warrant sufficiency, Confidential informant, collective knowledge

Officer Dickens submitted an affidavit, seeking a search warrant for 10318 Dove Avenue, a single-family Cleveland residence. Dickens averred that earlier that month a confidential informant disclosed to him that a dealer, Moore, was selling cocaine out of that residence. He described Moore’s race, height, weight, age, and date of birth and disclosed that Moore deployed an extensive electronic surveillance system. Moore had been charged with several past drug crimes, including one prior conviction for drug trafficking. Dickens also described a controlled drug buy between the informant and Moore that occurred earlier that month at the Dove residence, under surveillance. The state court issued the search warrant. Officers detained Moore and found two firearms, two kilograms of cocaine, 100 grams of cocaine base, and materials used to facilitate large-scale drug trafficking. An ATF officer arrived, advised Moore of his Miranda rights, and interviewed Moore. Moore was indicted on five federal counts involving conspiracy, possessing and intending to distribute cocaine and cocaine base, possessing firearms while a felon, and possessing firearms to further a drug trafficking crime. Moore unsuccessfully moved to suppress the evidence, arguing that the affidavit lacked indicia that the confidential informant was reliable. The Sixth Circuit affirmed. Collectively, the information provided demonstrated a fair probability that evidence of drug trafficking would be found at Dove.

United States v. Woodfork   7thCIR   4JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Confidential Informant, reliability, warrant application

Danville Officer Crawley sought a warrant to search Woodfork’s home. Crawley testified under oath, identifying Woodfork as the target of the request, stating that Woodfork had sold crystal methamphetamine in a controlled buy to a confidential source (CS) that day. Officers had searched the SC before and after that buy and surveilled the transaction, which was recorded. Crawley had relied on the CS “multiple times” and found him “reliable.” The officers attempted to set up a second controlled buy, using another reliable CS. Woodfork had insisted that the CS come to Woodfork’s home, which was described by naming an intersection, understood to be 1220 North Franklin Street. The judge issued a search warrant for Woodfork’s North Franklin home. Officers discovered methamphetamine and a firearm. Woodfork moved to quash the warrant and or to suppress the evidence, arguing that he was entitled to a "Franks" hearing and suppression because Crawley misled the county judge regarding the identification of his home and by omitting details about the CS's criminal histories. The Seventh Circuit affirmed the denial of Woodfork’s motion. Crawley and the judge were not simply relying on the uncorroborated word of the CS; a controlled buy, properly executed, is generally a reliable indicator of the presence of illegal drug activity. The omission of information about the sources’ backgrounds, criminal histories, or motives does not change the probable cause determination. Crawley testified; the court could assess his credibility and ask questions.

United States v. Eggerson   8thCIR   7JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** warrant execution, scope of search, good faith, cellphone search

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress after he was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm. In regard to the first warrant that authorized police to search for guns, items tending to show possession of guns, and electronic storage devices which would tend to store or send information relating to illegal drug trafficking, the court concluded that an objectively reasonable officer could have believed that the warrant permitted him to search for evidence of illegal gun possession, including defendant's cell phone. Therefore, the video found on the cell phone was admissible under the good faith doctrine. The court also concluded that there was a substantial basis to find that probable cause existed to seize defendant's phone and, even if there were not, the court would nonetheless conclude that the good faith exception applied.

United States v. Martin   8thCIR   7JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Show-Up Identification, reasonable suspicion, Terry Stop of vehicle, GPS data

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motions to suppress and his objection to the application of the career criminal enhancement under USSG 4B1.1(a). Defendant robbed a Sprint Wireless Express store in Davenport, Iowa at gunpoint, making off with cell phones and tablets. Defendant also left with a GPS tracker, which the police used to track him down. The court concluded that police had at least a reasonable suspicion to stop the vehicle based on the GPS tracker and, considering the tight window of opportunity officers had to locate a fleeing suspect, it was reasonable for police to rely on third-party GPS data. Furthermore, other factors supported the officers' suspicion, including the fact that defendant's vehicle matched the description given by a store employee and the police noticed unusual behavior from the occupants of the vehicle. The court also concluded that any error in the district court's denial of his motion to suppress the use of the show-up lineup was harmless. Finally, the district court did not err in determining defendant had two prior felony convictions for crimes of violence for purposes of sentencing him as a career offender under USSG 4B1.1.

United States v. Eggerson   8thCIR   7JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** warrant execution, good faith

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress after he was convicted of being a felon in possession of a firearm. In regard to the first warrant that authorized police to search for guns, items tending to show possession of guns, and electronic storage devices which would tend to store or send information relating to illegal drug trafficking, the court concluded that an objectively reasonable officer could have believed that the warrant permitted him to search for evidence of illegal gun possession, including defendant's cell phone. Therefore, the video found on the cell phone was admissible under the good faith doctrine. The court also concluded that there was a substantial basis to find that probable cause existed to seize defendant's phone and, even if there were not, the court would nonetheless conclude that the good faith exception applied.

State v. Liebenguth  CTSCt   8JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** First Amendment

The Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the Appellate Court concluding that Defendant's conviction of breach of the peace in the second degree must be reversed because the First Amendment barred his prosecution for the statements at issue, holding that Defendant's remarks were unprotected fighting words, and therefore, his conviction did not violate the First Amendment. At issue were Defendant's "vulgar and racially charged" remarks that included utterances of the words "fucking niggers" directed at an African-American parking enforcement official following Defendant's receipt of a parking ticket. As a result of this conduct, Defendant was convicted of breach of the peace in the second degree. The Appellate Court reversed, concluding that Defendant's speech was constitutionally protected. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that the Appellate Court erred in concluding that Defendant's language did not constitute fighting words.

State v. Diego   INSCt   9JUN2021
Tags:

The Supreme Court reversed the order of the trial court suppressing statements made by Defendant during a police interview, holding that the circumstances did not amount to a custodial interrogation. At issue was whether Defendant's freedom of movement was curtailed to a level associated with formal arrest when he had a free-flowing exchange in a detective's personal office. In granting Defendant's motion to suppress the trial court concluded that the circumstances were akin to a custodial interrogation and that the statements were obtained in violation of the Fifth Amendment. The Supreme Court disagreed and reversed the suppression order, holding that the limited curtailment of Defendant's freedom of movement did not amount to a formal arrest.

Commonwealth v. Ortiz  MASCt  8JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** automobile exception

The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed Defendant's conviction of unlawful distribution of heroin as a subsequent offender and unlawful possession of heroin with intent to distribute as a subsequent offender, holding that the superior court did not err by denying Defendant's motion to suppress and that there was no other error. In his suppression motion, Defendant sought to suppress evidence found during a warrantless search of a motor vehicle. The superior court denied the motion to suppress. The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed the denial of the suppression motion and Defendant's convictions, holding (1) the police had probable cause to search the vehicle, and there was no error in the denial of the motion to suppress; (2) the trial judge erred in allowing the admission of an in-court identification made by a police officer, but the error did not prejudice Defendant; and (3) there was no substantial risk of a miscarriage of justice as to the jury instructions on possession and distribution of narcotics.

State v. Genous   WISCt   4JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** reasonable suspicion, terry stop of a vehicle

The Supreme Court reversed the decision of the court of appeals reversing the judgment of the circuit court denying Defendant's motion to suppress certain firearm evidence on the grounds that the police officer lacked reasonable suspicion to stop Defendant's vehicle, holding that, under the totality of the circumstances, the stop was lawful. At issue was whether the law enforcement officer in this case has a reasonable suspicion that Defendant had committed or was about to commit a crime. The court of appeals concluded that the stop was unlawful. The Supreme Court disagreed and reversed, holding that, considering the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable law enforcement officer knowing what the officer in this case knew and seeing what he saw would reasonably suspected that Defendant was engaged in a drug transaction, and therefore, the investigatory stop of Defendant's vehicle complied with the Fourth Amendment.

State v. VanBeek   WISCt   4JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** reasonable suspicion, extended traffic stop, Rodriguez Rule Violation

The Supreme Court reversed the circuit court's judgment of conviction of Defendant for possession of methamphetamine and drug paraphernalia and remanded with instructions to grant Defendant's motion to suppress, holding that the seizure of Defendant was unlawful because the police officer did not have reasonable suspicion that Defendant was engaged in criminal activity. Defendant's conviction arose from a search of her vehicle. On appeal, Defendant argued that the circuit court erred in denying her motion to suppress because the search violated her Fourth Amendment right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures. The Supreme Court agreed, holding (1) Defendant was seized when the officer returned to her vehicle after running a records check, withheld her driver's license, and continued to question her and her passenger in order to hold her until a drug-sniff dog arrived; and (2) the seizure was unlawful because Defendant did not have a reasonable suspicion that Defendant was engaged in criminal activity at the time he seized her.

USE OF FORCE

NO CASES
