---
source: "23 BF 4JUN2021.docx"
tags:
  - Inventory-Search
  - REP-Text-Messages
  - Emergency-Exigency
---

23 BF 4JUN2021

United States v. Simmermaker   8thCIR   1JUN2021
Tags: 

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress evidence seized from her lockbox in an action where she pleaded guilty to possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance. In this case, the search warrant was for evidence of drug use and distribution. Furthermore, officers saw defendant on the couch, asleep, with a meth pipe next to her. The court concluded that this was enough to give officers particularized suspicion that defendant was connected to the illicit activity that provided the basis for the warrant. The court explained that, while defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the lockbox, officers had probable cause that she was involved in the criminal activity that formed the basis for the warrant. Therefore, defendant's lockbox fell within the scope of the warrant and searching it was lawful.

United States v. Suggs   10thCIR   2JUN2021
Tags:

This appeal stemmed from a road rage incident at the corner of a crosswalk in Colorado Springs: a pedestrian wanted to cross the street, the driver of a vehicle wanted to turn right. Words were exchanged, the driver pulled out a gun and took a shot at the pedestrian. The bullet didn’t strike anyone. The vehicle sped off, and the pedestrian called 911. Law enforcement focused their investigation on Defendant Perry Suggs. Warrants were issued, Defendant’s home was searched, and incriminating evidence was discovered. A federal grand jury charged Defendant with possession of a firearm and ammunition by a convicted felon. Before trial, Defendant moved to suppress the evidence found during sequential searches of his home and an SUV parked under his carport, arguing that the warrant to search his home violated the Fourth Amendment’s particularity requirement and that officers would not have found the evidence used against him but for the invalid warrant. The district court disagreed and denied the motion. Defendant appealed that decision. The Tenth Circuit determined the district court erred when it denied Defendant’s motion to suppress. “Because the residential search warrant failed to meet the Fourth Amendment’s particularity requirement and cannot be saved by the severability doctrine, we vacate the order denying Defendant’s suppression motion.” Yet the question remained whether the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule saved the incriminating evidence from suppression. The case was remanded for the district court to resolve underlying factual disputes and consider that remedial question in light of the Tenth Circuit’s holding.

Combs v. State   INSCt   3JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Inventory Search

The Supreme Court affirmed the judgment of the trial court denying Defendant's motion to suppress the fruits of an inventory search of the company van he was driving, holding that the van's seizure and search were lawful. Defendant was driving his company van when we served off the road, demolished a utility box, then drove to his nearby home. The responding officer found Defendant as he was parking in his front driveway and took him to the hospital for a blood test. Later, other officers conducted an inventory search of the van, which revealed pills in a bag under the driver's seat, and then towed the van as evidence of leaving the scene of an accident. Defendant was charged with several offenses and moved to suppress the pills. The trial court denied the motion to suppress, and a jury convicted Defendant of most of the charges. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that the search and seizure of Defendant's van fell under recognized exceptions to the warrant requirement of the Fourth Amendment, and therefore, the police officers lawfully discovered the pills.

Commonwealth v. Delgado-Rivera   MASJC   1JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** REP Text Messages

The Supreme Judicial Court vacated the decision of the superior court judge allowing Defendant's motion to suppress, holding that Defendant enjoyed no reasonable expectation of privacy in the text messages sent by him that were stored on a cellular telephone belonging to, and possessed by, another person. Defendant and six codefendants were indicted on charges of trafficking in cocaine, conspiracy to violate drug laws, and conspiracy to commit money laundering. The charges stemmed from an investigation originating, in part, from evidence acquired during a search of a codefendant's cell phone. The owner of the telephone filed a motion to suppress evidence obtained as a result of the search of his phone, including the contents of text messages sent by Defendant. Defendant moved to join the motion. The Commonwealth opposed the motion, arguing that Defendant lacked standing to challenge the search. The judge ruled that Defendant had standing and allowed him to join the motion. The Supreme Judicial Court reversed, holding that Defendant could not challenge the reasonableness of the search because he lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy in the sent text messages.

North Dakota v. Black   NDSCt   3JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Emergency Exigency

James Black appealed following his conditional guilty plea to ten counts of possession of certain materials prohibited, class C felonies. Black argued the district court was required to suppress evidence obtained during an unreasonable search following an improper initial entry into his home. Black also argued the trial court was required to suppress evidence obtained during a subsequent search of his home pursuant to a search warrant that lacked probable cause. After review, the North Dakota Supreme Court concluded the initial search was not unreasonable and the subsequent search warrant was valid. Therefore, judgment was affirmed.

USE OF FORCE CASES
