---
source: "BF1 3JAN2025.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF1 3JAN2025

**United States**** v. Neely**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit
December 27, 2024
Docket: 23-3166

*LEO LAW Topic**s 7-2, 7-12**: **There was no evidence that **the **lack of Miranda warnings **at the first two interviews **w**as** intentional**,** such that **the **warning provided at **the **third interview was ineffective.*

Darrell Neely, radio host of the streaming show "Global Enlightenment Radio Network," was part of a crowd of people who stormed the Capitol on January 6, 2021. When Neely entered the Capitol grounds, law enforcement had established a line barring further entry, and signs displayed that the area was closed. Neely spent at least 20 minutes on the Lower West Terrace of the Capitol grounds, then entered the building itself, where he remained for over an hour. While in the building, Neely took various items that belonged to the Government, including a U.S. Capitol Police patch, badge, name tag, and baseball hat. Neely later wore the baseball hat while broadcasting his radio show. 

He was later indicted and convicted of five misdemeanor offenses, resulting in a 28-month prison sentence. Neely appealed, challenging the denial of pretrial motions, including a motion to suppress his confession. That motion argued that Neely's written waiver of his Miranda rights was neither voluntary nor intelligent as required by the Fifth Amendment. The challenged interview was Neely's third conversation with the FBI. The first two occurred before his arrest, in January and June 2021. Neely claims that because he was not provided with Miranda warnings during the first two interviews, the warning given prior to the third interview was constitutionally ineffective under *Missouri v. Seibert*, 542 U.S. 600 (2004).

The United States District Court for the District of Columbia denied Neely's motion to suppress his confession. On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit determined that Neely's Miranda rights were not violated, as there was no evidence of a deliberate two-step interrogation strategy by the FBI. Consequently, the court affirmed Neely's convictions and sentence.

**United States v.**** I****n**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
December 30, 2024
Docket: 23-2917

*LEO LAW Topic** 3-6**: **The u**se of handcuffs during **a **traffic stop was justified and did not turn the detention into a de facto arrest.*

Larry Seng In was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm after a gun was found in his car during a traffic stop. In moved to suppress the firearm, arguing that the officers' actions, particularly handcuffing him, escalated a valid Terry stop into an unlawful de facto arrest because they handcuffed him before having probable cause to believe he was prohibited from possessing the gun.

The district granted In's motion to suppress, holding that the gun was obtained as a result of an unlawful de facto arrest without probable cause. The Government appealed.

On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the traffic stop did not turn into a de facto arrest. The officers had a sufficient and reasonable basis to fear for their safety, justifying their decision to handcuff In during their investigation. The court noted that the presence of an unsecured gun in the car, In's initial dishonesty about the gun, and the location of the stop near a densely populated area contributed to the reasonableness of the officer's actions. Consequently, the court reversed the district court's order granting the suppression motion and remanded the case for trial.

**State of Maine v. Kelley**
Maine Supreme Judicial Court
January 1, 2025

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **1-16, 2-2**:** The passenger did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle's contents and, therefore**,** had no standing to contest the vehicle search.*

In 2020, a Maine Drug Enforcement Agency (MDEA) Special Agent was investigating Keith Wedge for suspected drug-related activity. As part of his investigation, the Special Agent obtained two warrants authorizing the tracking of Wedge's vehicle using an electronic tracking device. In early 2021, the Special Agent obtained a warrant to search Wedge's vehicle. When MDEA agents executed the warrant and conducted the search, Wedge was driving the car, and Kelley was a passenger. The search revealed drugs in the vehicle. Both Wedge and Kelley were arrested. Kelley was charged with aggravated trafficking of scheduled drugs. Kelley moved to suppress the evidence obtained through the warrants, arguing he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle because he was "a regular passenger" who "spent hours riding in the passenger seat" on trips "all around Mount Desert Island," to Bangor, and to Massachusetts and because he stored his fishing boots and sea bag in the vehicle for about a month.

The trial court denied Kelley's motion to suppress, holding that Kelley lacked standing to challenge the search. Kelley argued that the court should not have reached the question of his standing because the State had stipulated that he had a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle. However, the court concluded that standing is a threshold issue that must be addressed, and Kelley did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle.

On appeal, the Maine Supreme Judicial Court held that Kelley lacked a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle. The court noted that Kelley did not own the car, had never driven it, and had only stored personal items in it for a short period. Therefore, Kelley did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the vehicle and thus lacked standing to challenge the search warrants. The judgment of conviction was affirmed.
