---
source: "BF27 5JUL2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF27  5JUL2024

**NOT FOR PUBLICATION**

**Moody v. NetChoice, LLC**
US Supreme Court
Docket: 22-277
Opinion Date: July 1, 2024

*Topic: State restrictions on social-media censorship of posts.*

In 2021, Florida and Texas enacted statutes regulating large social-media companies and other internet platforms. The laws curtailed the platforms' ability to engage in content moderation and required them to provide reasons to a user if they removed or altered her posts. NetChoice L.L.C., a trade association whose members include Facebook and YouTube, brought First Amendment challenges against the two laws. District courts in both states entered preliminary injunctions.

The Eleventh Circuit upheld the injunction of Florida's law, holding that the state's restrictions on content moderation trigger First Amendment scrutiny. The court concluded that the content-moderation provisions are unlikely to survive heightened scrutiny. The Fifth Circuit, however, disagreed and reversed the preliminary injunction of the Texas law. The court held that the platforms' content-moderation activities are "not speech" at all, and so do not implicate the First Amendment.

The Supreme Court of the United States vacated the judgments and remanded the cases, stating that neither the Eleventh Circuit nor the Fifth Circuit conducted a proper analysis of the facial First Amendment challenges to Florida and Texas laws regulating large internet platforms. The court held that the laws interfere with protected speech, as they prevent the platforms from compiling the third-party speech they want in the way they want, thus producing their own distinctive compilations of expression. The court also held that Texas's asserted interest in correcting the mix of viewpoints that major platforms present is not valid under the First Amendment.

**City of Grants Pass v. Johnson**
US Supreme Court
Docket: 23-175
Opinion Date: June 28, 2024

*Topic: State restrictions on public camping prohibitions against homeless.*

The case involves the city of Grants Pass, Oregon, and its laws restricting public camping. The city's laws prohibit activities such as camping on public property or parking overnight in the city's parks. Violations can result in fines and, in the case of multiple violations, imprisonment. A group of homeless individuals filed a class action lawsuit against the city, arguing that these ordinances violated the Eighth Amendment's prohibition against cruel and unusual punishment. The district court agreed with the plaintiffs, citing a previous Ninth Circuit decision, Martin v. Boise, which held that cities cannot enforce public camping ordinances against homeless individuals when the number of homeless individuals exceeds the number of available shelter beds.

The Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision, leading to the city's appeal to the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit's decision, holding that the enforcement of laws regulating camping on public property does not constitute "cruel and unusual punishment" prohibited by the Eighth Amendment. The court reasoned that the Eighth Amendment focuses on the punishment a government may impose after a criminal conviction, not on whether a government may criminalize particular behavior in the first place. The court also noted that the punishments imposed by the city of Grants Pass, such as fines and temporary bans from public parks, did not qualify as cruel and unusual under the Eighth Amendment. The case was remanded for further proceedings consistent with the Supreme Court's opinion.

**Sanchez v. Guzman**
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
June 28, 2024

LEO LAW Topic : plainitff fails to show clearly established law in Q.I. deadly force case.

Marta Sanchez, the estate of Stephanie Lopez, and Dominic Martinez, brought a 42 U.S.C. §1983 excessive-force civil suit against officers from the Littleton and Englewood Police Departments in Colorado. The plaintiffs alleged that the officers fired 66 bullets into their motionless vehicle while they were attempting to surrender, resulting in the death of Stephanie Lopez, severe injuries to Dominic Martinez, and rendering Marta Sanchez as a person with paraplegia. The defendants, however, described a high-speed car chase following an armed carjacking, during which the plaintiffs allegedly used their vehicle as a weapon and endangered the public.

The district court granted summary judgment to the defendants, ruling that they were entitled to qualified immunity. The court found that the plaintiffs failed to carry their burden on the clearly established law issue. The plaintiffs appealed this decision.

The Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The appellate court found that the plaintiffs failed to provide a record-based factual universe upon which the court could conduct a clearly established law analysis. The court held that the plaintiffs effectively waived their review of their challenge to the district court's grant of qualified immunity to the defendants. The court concluded that without a record-based factual universe reflecting the plaintiffs' version of events, it could not opine on whether the district court committed reversible error in concluding that the plaintiffs did not satisfy the clearly established law prong of the qualified-immunity test.
*(PURELY PROCEDURAL)*

**FEDERAL SEARCH AND SEIZURE CASES**

*FOURTH CIRCUIT*

**United States v. Bowman**
US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
July 1, 2024
Docket: 22-4680

*LEO LAW Topic **7-4**: **A spontaneous, unsolicited statement made while in custody **is not **"**interrogation**"** **for Miranda purposes**. *

In March 2022, law enforcement officers executed a search warrant on Bowman's property and vehicles in Meadowview, Virginia. During the search, they found evidence of drug distribution. An arrest warrant was issued, and Bowman was located and arrested outside of his hotel room. Officers then took Bowman into the hotel room to talk. As they entered the room, Bowman proclaimed, "I am good at what I do, and I'm connected with the Sinaloa Cartel." Surprised by this unprompted assertion, the lead investigator, Drug Enforcement Agency Special Agent Brian Snedeker, stopped Bowman from saying anything else, got a Miranda card, provided Bowman a Miranda warning, and then asked Bowman if he wanted to talk to the officers. Bowman said yes. Not once during this process did Bowman ask for a lawyer. Bowman proceeded to tell officers that "he sold drugs for a living." Bowman was indicted for drug distribution offenses.

Before his trial, Bowman filed a motion to suppress his initial statements to the officers, arguing that they were made before his Miranda rights were read. The district court denied the motion without holding an evidentiary hearing, determining that Bowman had not been interrogated before making the statements in question. 

The Fourth Circuit found that the district court had not erred in denying Bowman's motion to suppress without an evidentiary hearing, as no material factual disputes warranted a hearing. Accordingly, the court affirmed Bowman's convictions.

*SIXTH CIRCUIT*

**United States v. Neal**
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
July 1, 2024
Docket: 23-5299

*LEO LAW Topic**s 1-15,** **4-2**:** **The w**arrant affidavit was minimally sufficient **to permit **the **application of the** good faith exception to **the **ex**cl**usionary rule.*

Shelby County officers executed a search warrant at the residence of Corey Neal, discovering three firearms. Neal, a convicted felon, was charged with federal firearm offenses. 

At trial, Neal sought to suppress the firearms, arguing the search warrant was invalid for the lack of probable cause. The district court denied Neal's motion to suppress the evidence found at his residence. The court agreed that the warrant lacked probable cause but invoked the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule from *United States v. Leon*, which allows evidence obtained in good faith reliance on a search warrant later found to be deficient. 

On appeal to the Sixth Circuit, the court found that the affidavit supporting the search warrant established a "minimally sufficient nexus" between the items sought and the place to be searched. The court held that the affidavit provided more than a "naked guess" that contraband might be found at Neal's residence. Furthermore, it established recent drug trafficking by Neal and evidence of Neal's residency. The court concluded that the affidavit was not so "bare bones" as to necessitate the application of the exclusionary rule, thereby upholding the lower court's application of the good faith exception to the exclusionary rule.

*SEVENTH CIRCUIT*

**United States v. Plancarte**
Court: U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
June 28, 2024
Docket: 23-2224

*LEO LAW Topic **2-7**:**  K9 sniff **to detect only contraband **was not a Fourth Amendment search**.*

On the evening of January 20, 2022, Officer James Mancuso was conducting surveillance in La Crosse, Wisconsin, when a state trooper notified him of a vehicle of interest heading in his direction. Soon after, Mancuso saw a car matching the trooper's description and tailed it for several hours. As he followed the car, he observed the vehicle exhibiting behavior consistent with drug trafficking activity. Mancuso also noticed that the car had unlawful window tints, so he directed two other officers to perform a pretextual traffic stop. During the stop, Officer Aaron Westpfahl and his K-9 partner, Loki, arrived on the scene. Loki conducted a sniff and alerted to drugs in the car. The officers then searched the vehicle and discovered a backpack containing "a large amount of a crystal-like substance" in its trunk. They arrested the car's occupants, including Plancarte. Lab testing later revealed that the substance in the backpack was nearly 11 pounds of methamphetamine. 

The defendant, Juventino Plancarte, who was in the car during the stop, was indicted on two counts related to methamphetamine distribution. He moved to suppress the evidence obtained after the dog's sniff, arguing that the dog could identify both illegal marijuana products and legal products that come from cannabis plants. Therefore, he contended that the sniff violated the Fourth Amendment as it was a warrantless search unsupported by probable cause. However, the district court adopted the magistrate judge's recommendations denying Plancarte's suppression motion, leading to his guilty plea to both drug charges.

The Seventh Circuit The court held that the dog sniff did not constitute a Fourth Amendment search as it did not disrupt any reasonable expectation of privacy. The court noted that the dog sniff occurred outside the home, in a public area, and during a lawful traffic stop, which generally does not implicate legitimate privacy interests. The court also pointed out that the dog's sniff was not designed to disclose any information other than the presence or absence of narcotics. Therefore, the court affirmed the district court's decision denying Plancarte's motion to suppress.

*Editors Note: The defendant sought to apply the rationale in Kyllo to K9 sniffs, which was suggested by Justice Kagan in her concurring opinion in Florida v. Jardines: **"**They [Police K9s] are to the poodle down the street as high-powered binoculars are to a piece of plain glass.**"** Florida v. Jardines, 569 U.S. 1, 13 (2013), but the Seventh Circuit **declined, instead applying the contraband-specific doctrine of **United States v. Place**:* *"**A "canine sniff" by a well-trained narcotics detection dog, however, does not require opening the luggage. It does not expose noncontraband items that otherwise would remain hidden from public view, as does, for example, an officer's rummaging through the contents of the luggage.**"** United States v. Place, 462 U.S. 696, 707 (1983)**.*

**United States v. Huazhi Han**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
June 28, 2024
Docket: 23-1020

*LEO LAW Topic** 5-16**:** **The wife's consent to search the home was voluntary under a totality of the circumstances.*

The Drug Enforcement Administration and Chicago Police Department began investigating a money laundering organization in Chicago, where Huazhi Han played a key role. Han used his electronic goods business to launder drug proceeds for Mexican drug traffickers and received cash proceeds from a drug trafficker, Rafiq Roman, on multiple occasions. After Roman's arrest, he cooperated with the authorities, leading to Han's arrest. The officers found a loaded firearm, approximately $200,000 in cash, and lookalike currency in Han's car. After arresting Han, officers went to Han's home and told his wife, Wang, that Han had agreed to a search of the house and that there could be firearms present that posed a hazard to her baby. Wang allowed them in the house, where they found nearly $1.3 million in cash, a money counter, rubber bands, and firearms.

Han was indicted on four charges, including conspiracy to commit money laundering and operating an unlicensed money-transmitting business. Before trial, Han moved to suppress the evidence seized from his home, arguing that the officers searched his house without a warrant or consent. The district court denied the motion, finding that Han's wife had voluntarily consented to the search. The case proceeded to a jury trial, where Han was convicted on all counts.

On appeal, Han argued that the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress because his wife's consent was not voluntary. The Seventh Circuit opined that in assessing voluntariness, courts look to the totality of the circumstances, including "(1) the person's age, intelligence, and education; (2) whether he was advised of his constitutional rights; (3) how long he was detained before he gave his consent; (4) whether his consent was immediate, or was prompted by repeated requests by the authorities; (5) whether any physical coercion was used; and (6) whether the individual was in police custody when he gave his consent. Viewing these factors in the totality of the circumstances, the court held that the district court did not clearly err when finding that they tip the scales in favor of voluntary consent. Accordingly, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling denying the motion to suppress.

**U****nited States**** v. Salas**
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
July 3, 2024
Docket: 23-8027

*LEO LAW Topic **1-14**:** The initial w**arrant included **the iP**hone **seizure and **search** so that child pornography on the iPhone would have been inev**itabl**y** discover**ed.*

In February 2021, Salvador Salas, Jr. was accused by a 13-year-old girl of giving her methamphetamine, sexually abusing her, and photographing the incident. The police obtained a warrant to search Salas's home and vehicle for drugs and related evidence. During the search, they seized Salas's iPhone and a hard drive. Suspecting Salas of producing or possessing child pornography, the officers obtained a second warrant to search for evidence. They seized a laptop and another hard drive from Salas's residence. A digital forensic analyst found child pornography on Salas's iPhone, laptop, and hard drive. Salas was charged with six federal counts of possessing and producing child pornography.

Salas filed a motion to suppress the evidence seized, arguing that the second warrant lacked probable cause and violated his Fourth Amendment rights. He also argued that the child pornography on his iPhone, seized under the first warrant, would not have been inevitably discovered because the first warrant only authorized the seizure, but not the search, of his iPhone. The district court agreed that the second warrant lacked probable cause but declined to suppress the child pornography evidence. It found that the first warrant allowed for both the seizure and search of Salas's iPhone, and therefore, child pornography would have been inevitably discovered by the officers as part of their investigation into Salas's drug activities. Salas was convicted on all counts and appealed.

The Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court held that the first warrant was sufficiently particular to justify both the seizure and search of Salas's iPhone. The court further held that the child pornography on Salas's iPhone would have been inevitably discovered because Salas's child pornography would not have indefinitely stayed hidden behind his iPhone's locked passcode.

**STATE SEARCH AND SEIZURE CASES**

**Herard v. State of Florida**
Florida Supreme Court
Opinion Date: July 3, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **7-8**:**  **The suspect reinitiated contact after invoking the right to counsel, and therefore, there was no unlawful reapproach by the officers, and his subsequent Miranda waiver was valid. *

James Herard, a member of the "BACC Street Crips," was arrested and tried for 18 gang-related felonies, including the first-degree murders of Eric Jean-Pierre and Kiem Huynh. Herard's initial custodial interrogation was conducted at the Lauderhill Police Department. The interrogation took place after Herard's arrest for stealing a pit bull. Before questioning began, a detective provided Herard with a *Miranda* rights advisement from a waiver of rights form. Herard initialed the form to indicate that he understood his rights. The detective then read aloud the remaining portion of the form, which affirmed the voluntariness of Herard's statement and his willingness to answer the detectives' questions without an attorney. When the detective finished reading, Herard said, "I don't agree to that," and added that he wanted an attorney. The detective replied, "Oh, okay, that's no problem."

Immediately after that, as the detective collected her paperwork to leave the room, Herard said: "Hold on, hold on. If I get an attorney, do I gotta wait?" A brief conversation ensued, and the detective explained to Herard that he would not wait in the interview room but would be booked and remain there until an attorney arrived. Herard then said, "I don't want an attorney." The detective responded, "Do you want to talk or not?" Herard then asked to sign the paperwork. The detective again asked, "Do you want to talk to us?" Herard answered "yes" and signed the waiver of rights form. During the ensuing interview, Herard made incriminating statements about the theft of the pit bull.

Herard's trial was held in May 2014, where the prosecution presented evidence of incriminating statements made by Herard to law enforcement following his arrest for stealing a pit bull. The defense argued that Herard's statements should have been suppressed as involuntary. According to Herard, once he invoked his right to an attorney, there should have been no further questioning without an attorney present. The trial court rejected that argument after finding that Herard reinitiated communication with the police and then validly waived his Miranda rights.

The Florida Supreme Court noted that when a suspect unequivocally invokes the Miranda right to counsel, the officers must immediately stop questioning the suspect. Both parties agreed that Herard's invocation of his right to counsel was unequivocal. After invoking the right to counsel, there can be no subsequent interrogation of the suspect without counsel present unless two conditions are met: (1) the suspect must reinitiate contact with the police, and (2) the suspect must knowingly and voluntarily waive his earlier-invoked Miranda rights. The latter inquiry turns on the totality of the circumstances. The court held, "We have no difficulty finding these conditions met here." Accordingly, the Supreme Court of Florida affirmed the lower court's decision denying his motions to suppress the incriminating statements.

**S****tate of Iowa v. Bauler**
Iowa Supreme Court
June 28, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **2-7, 2-11**:**  **The fact that the handler and the drug K9 briefly touched the outside of the vehicle did not render the K9 sniff unlawful under the Fourth Amendment. *

During a traffic stop based on the reasonable suspicion that the driver was impaired, a police K9 "Ace" was directed to sniff the vehicle. Officer Rohmiller (Ace's handler) touched the vehicle to instruct Ace where to sniff, and Ace touched the vehicle several times with his paws while conducting the sniff. Ace eventually alerted, and a search of the vehicle and the defendant's purse revealed methamphetamine and related drug paraphernalia.

Prosecuted for the drug offenses, the defendant filed a motion to suppress the evidence, arguing the traffic stop was unjustified, the dog sniff constituted an unconstitutional search because the dog touched the exterior of her vehicle, and the search of her purse was unlawful. The district court denied the motions to suppress, and the defendant was found guilty on three counts.

The Supreme Court of Iowa affirmed the lower court's decision. The court held that the traffic stop was justified at its inception due to the defendant's driving behavior. It also ruled that the dog sniff did not violate the Fourth Amendment or the Iowa Constitution, as the dog was in a place where police had a right to be, and the sniff only revealed the presence or absence of contraband. The court did not rule on the legality of the purse search, as the defendant failed to raise and preserve the issue for appeal properly.

*Editor**'**s Note: This case juxtaposes the Supreme court**'**s decisions in Jones and Jardines with the decisions of Caballes and Place. The court resolved this juxtaposition by minimalizing the applicability of the former in favor of the latter. The court stated:*

*"We conclude that ruff justice is inevitably going to be rough justice, and that the legality of a dog sniff does not turn on the fine point of whether the handler or the dog briefly touched the outside of the vehicle, so long as there was no entry into the private space inside the vehicle."*

**State v. Niebling**
New Hampshire Supreme Court
July 2, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **5-24**:** **The** search incident to arrest **of **the suspect**'**s **wallet at** the** jail was lawful**.*

Avram Niebling was arrested for driving under the influence. The arresting officer conducted a cursory search of Niebling and removed a wallet from his pocket. The wallet was not searched incident to arrest at the scene but was placed in an evidence bag and taken to the police station. During the booking process at the station, the officers counted the cash in the wallet and looked inside for the defendant's driver's license. While doing so, they discovered two white pills identified as oxycodone. 

Charged with the possession of a controlled substance, the defendant moved to suppress the evidence obtained from the wallet, arguing that there was no applicable exception to a warrantless search of the wallet during the booking process. The Superior Court denied the motion, finding that the search of the wallet was a lawful search incident to arrest. The defendant appealed, arguing that the warrantless search of his wallet was neither conducted incident to arrest nor conducted under a neutral inventory policy and was therefore unreasonable and unconstitutional.

The Supreme Court of New Hampshire affirmed the lower court's decision. The court held that a search that may be made at the time and place of arrest may also be legally conducted when the arrested individual arrives at a detention center. The court found that because the defendant's wallet was seized during a lawful arrest, the officer was permitted to search it at the police station during the booking process without a warrant. The court distinguished this case from others, where the property was searched at the officer's convenience after a long time and was under the arresting officer's exclusive control. In this case, the arresting officer obtained possession of the defendant's wallet during a lawful arrest and looked inside it at the time of the defendant's booking at the police station while the defendant was present. Therefore, the court held that the trial court did not err in determining that the search of the wallet fell within the search incident to arrest exception to the warrant requirement.

**State v. Pires**
Rhode Island Supreme Court
June 26, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic** 1-7, 6-7**:** **A s**eizure **that **occu**r**red **when** **the **suspect was ordered to **show** his hands** was unsupported by the requisite reasonable suspicion that criminal activity was afoot.*

In June 2016, a Pawtucket patrol officer responded to a dispatch report that a light-skinned black male, wearing a striped shirt and dark pants, was walking around with a gun. Upon arrival, the officer saw Pires, who matched the description. He did not observe any criminal activity or see a firearm but stopped Pires based on the dispatch information. He then ordered Pires to "show me your hands." The officer next ordered the defendant to turn around, face away, and walk backward toward the sound of his voice while keeping his hands up. Once the defendant came within twelve feet of the officer, he pivoted and reached for his waistband. At this point, he was subdued and searched. The search revealed a firearm and cocaine. 

Pires was convicted of carrying a firearm without a license and possession of a controlled substance. Pires challenged the trial justice's decision to deny his motion to suppress the evidence, arguing that the seizure violated his constitutional rights under the Fourth Amendment.

The Superior Court held a hearing on the motion to suppress and concluded that the gun and cocaine had been lawfully seized. The court found that the officer's thirty years of experience, the dispatch sending him to a high-crime area, Pires' match to the dispatch description, Pires' noncompliance to the officer's commands, and Pires' pivot to reach for his waistband amounted to the level of reasonable suspicion required to justify the warrantless stop.

The Supreme Court of Rhode Island reversed the decision on the motion to suppress and vacated the judgment of conviction. The court held that Pires was seized when he complied with the officer's order to raise his hands. The court found that the state failed to submit adequate evidence to show that reasonable suspicion existed at the inception of Pires' encounter with the officer. The court concluded that Pires' Fourth Amendment rights were violated because the state failed to submit adequate evidence to show that reasonable suspicion existed at the inception of his encounter with the officer.

**USE OF FORCE CASES**

**Evans v. Krook**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
July 3, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic**s 8-3, **9-4**:** Inconclusive video leav**ing** **unresolved **question**s** of fact** leads to denial of qualified immunity** in **a **deadly force case involving **a **suicidal suspect.*

In April 2018, Benjamin Evans was shot and killed by Police Deputy Brian Krook in Lake Elmo, Minnesota, after Evans knelt in a crosswalk with a loaded gun pointed at his own head. Following a criminal trial, Krook was acquitted of a second-degree manslaughter charge. Subsequently, Evans' father, William O. Evans, Jr., filed a civil lawsuit against Krook under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment. Krook sought summary judgment based on qualified immunity. The District Court for the District of Minnesota denied Krook's motion for summary judgment, citing genuine factual disputes over whether Evans' gun was pointed at the officers and whether Evans posed an immediate threat to them. Krook appealed.

The Eighth Circuit found that the applicability of qualified immunity, in this case, hinged on whether Krook acted reasonably under the circumstances by shooting Evans because Evans either pointed his gun at another or otherwise wielded his weapon in a threatening way. The court concluded that the inconclusive nighttime videos of Evans' actions did not clearly contradict the district court's factual determinations. Therefore, resolving the underlying factual dispute was beyond the court's limited review. As such, the court dismissed the appeal, stating it lacked the jurisdiction to resolve it.
