---
source: "BF2 10JAN2025.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF2 10JAN2025

FOURTH CIRCUIT

**United States v. Mayberry**
US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
January 7, 2025
Docket: 23-4051

*LEO LAW Topics **1-6, 2-2**:** The defendant's arrest was supported by probable cause developed through a cooperating informant and direct observation. The defendant abandoned the backpack and, therefore, did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the contents of the bag.*

At 4:00 a.m. on May 3, 2018, a South Carolina Highway Patrol officer stopped a car and found guns, methamphetamine, and $20,000 in cash. A passenger in the car told the officer that he was going to a Red Roof Inn in Gaffney, South Carolina, to purchase four pounds of methamphetamine from a man he knew as “Red.” He stated that he had purchased drugs from “Red” at this hotel on another occasion. Officers then set up surveillance and communicated with Red using the passenger's phone to arrange a drop at the hotel. Mayberry arrived in his vehicle and went to the designated room, where he was arrested Mayberry. A bag he was carrying was taken to the parking lot, where a K9 alerted on it. The bag was then searched, revealing 2 kilograms of methamphetamine.

Mayberry was charged with possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine and fentanyl, possession of a firearm in furtherance of a drug trafficking offense, and assault and resistance to official search or seizure. Mayberry moved to suppress the evidence obtained from his backpack based on Fourth Amendment violations. The district court denied Mayberry’s motions to suppress, finding that the officers had probable cause to arrest him and that he had abandoned his backpack. 

On appeal, the Fourth Circuit reviewed the case and affirmed the district court’s decisions. The court held that the officers had probable cause to arrest Mayberry based on the information provided by a cooperating individual and the real-time observations of Mayberry’s actions at the hotel. Additionally, the court upheld the district court’s finding that Mayberry had abandoned his backpack, thus relinquishing any reasonable expectation of privacy in it. Consequently, the search of the backpack was deemed lawful.

EIGHTH CIRCUIT 

**United States v. Rose**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
January 3, 2025
Docket: 23-3560

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **7-6, 10-2, 10-3**:** Traffic stop was valid at its inception and was not unreasonably prolonged by K9 sniff during mission-related activities. A thirty-minute delay between Miranda warnings and interrogation did not render the waiver invalid.*

In January 2020, Detective Winter of the Clinton, Iowa, Police Department spotted a car with heavily-tinted windows. At approximately 1:48 p.m., after following the car and watching it abruptly turn into a parking lot, Detective Winter initiated a traffic stop, believing the dark windows violated Iowa law. The driver of the car, Jonathan Rose, immediately got out, but Winter directed Rose to get back in the car.  Although Rose complied, his behavior made Winter nervous. Winter requested a patrol unit to bring a tint meter. He also requested a canine unit because he had information that Rose was involved with trafficking guns and drugs. Both arrived at the same time. While one officer was testing the window tint, the K9 officer walked the dog around the vehicle. At 1:58, before Detective Winter had completed the citation, the K9 alerted on the car. A search revealed drugs and paraphernalia, and Rose was arrested. During a search incident to arrest, more drugs were found on Rose. After being Mirandized, Rose made incriminating statements, which led to a warrant to search his house, where officers found ammunition, parts of an AR-15, and more paraphernalia. Later, at the county jail, officers again searched Rose and found a loaded pistol and baggie of drugs, which included methamphetamine.

Rose filed a motion to suppress the evidence at trial for the offenses, arguing that constitutional violations supported suppression. The district court denied Rose's motion to suppress the evidence, hold no constitutional violations occurred. 

On appeal, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of the motion to suppress. Regarding the traffic stop, the court noted Detective Winter stopped Rose because he reasonably believed the tint on Rose’s windows violated state law. Rose’s window tint allowed only 14% light transmittance, well below the 70% transmittance for front-seat windows required under Iowa law. The district court thus did not err in determining that Winter had probable cause to stop Rose. 

Regarding the K9 sniff, the court held the stop was not unreasonably prolonged by the dog sniff. Detective Winter’s body camera video starts at 1:48:41 p.m. when he began directing Rose to get back in his vehicle. Within approximately ten minutes of the initial stop, the drug dog arrived and alerted. During this time, Winter was communicating with dispatch about issues regarding Rose’s driving eligibility, running his information, and typing up citations. When Officer Roling informed him that the dog had alerted for drugs, Winter had not yet printed out Rose’s citations and there is no evidence Winter delayed printing the citations to facilitate the dog sniff. Rose’s stop was not, therefore, unreasonably prolonged because Winter was still carrying out the traffic-related purposes of the stop when the dog alerted, thereby giving the officers probable cause to search the car.

Regarding the alleged Miranda violation, the court noted that Rose began speaking to Detective Winter once in the police car. Winter interrupted Rose, provided a Miranda warning, and asked Rose if he understood them. Rose then conversed with Winter on the way to the police department. About thirty minutes later, at the police department, Winter asked Rose if he wanted to talk to him, and Rose made incriminating statements. The court also noted that Rose was thirty-one years old at the time, a high school graduate, and, as his extensive criminal history shows, was experienced with the criminal justice system. Accordingly, the court held that Rose was provided with his Miranda warnings and that he knowingly and voluntarily talked with the officers.  

Finding no constitutional violations in the traffic stop, searches, or Rose's incriminating statements, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion to suppress. 

**United States v. Harper**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
January 3, 2025
Docket: 24-1168

*LEO LAW Topic** 9-11**:** The detective placing his thumb on the defendant’s photograph twice during a photo array eyewitness identification was not impermissibly suggestive as to create a constitutional due process violation.*

George Harper, Jr. was indicted for being a felon in possession of ammunition following a shooting incident in Davenport, Iowa. Harper was identified by a witness who was shown surveillance video and a photo array by a detective. During the presentation of the photo array, the detective twice placed his thumb on Harper’s photograph when showing the photographs to the witness. Harper moved to suppress the identification, arguing that the detective placing his thumb on Harper’s picture was impermissibly suggestive, violating his constitutional due process rights.

The district court denied Harper’s motion to suppress the eyewitness identification, concluding that the witness knew Harper before the incident and that his reluctance to identify Harper initially was due to fear of involvement in a police investigation. The court also found the detective’s thumb placement on Harper’s photograph was not impermissibly suggestive. Harper pled guilty but preserved his right to appeal the denial of his motion to suppress.

On appeal, the Eighth Circuit held that the identification procedure did not create a substantial likelihood of irreparable misidentification, as the witness knew Harper and identified him from surveillance footage before the photo array. 

STATE CASES

IDAHO 

**State v. Ortiz**
Idaho Supreme Court - Criminal
January 8, 2025

*LEO LAW Topic **1-16**:** **The defendant, with a no-contact order prohibiting him from being within 300 feet of the marital home, did not have Fourth Amendment standing to challenge the warrantless searches made of the house.*

On April 27, 2020, Samantha Ruiz obtained a no-contact order against Ortiz. Ruiz was married to Ortiz and had three children with him. The no-contact order was issued based on allegations that Ortiz had committed domestic violence against Ruiz, and it prohibited Ortiz from being within 300 feet of the residence that he had shared with Ruiz and the children. After Ruiz’s family could not contact her for two days, several warrantless entries were made into the home. During the last entry, Ruiz’s body was found in a closet. Daniel Ortiz was charged with second-degree murder and violating a no-contact order. Ortiz filed a motion to suppress evidence obtained during a warrantless search of his home (and a subsequent search conducted with a warrant). 

The district court denied the motion to suppress, holding Ortiz did not have standing to challenge the search, as the no-contact order prohibited him from being near the home. 

On appeal, the Idaho Supreme Court reviewed the case and declined to overrule Rebo, finding that Ortiz failed to demonstrate that the decision was manifestly wrong. The court agreed that Ortiz lacked Fourth Amendment standing to challenge the warrantless search. The court held that Ortiz did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the home due to the no-contact order. 

NEVADA

**City of Las Vegas v. Las Vegas Police Protective Association**
Supreme Court of Nevada
January 9, 2025

*LEO LAW Topic** 9-12: T**he Nevada Peace Officer's Bill of Rights (POBR), codified at NRS 289.060, require**s** a ranked peace officer to conduct **disciplinary **investigations**, and the City of Las Vegas **violated the statute by having a human resources employee lead the investigation.*

John Arvanites and Jonathon Burdette, peace officers employed by the City of Las Vegas, were involved in a disciplinary investigation. The City referred the complaint to its Human Resources Department, and a human resources analyst conducted the interviews. The officers and the Las Vegas Police Protective Association sought declaratory and injunctive relief, arguing that the Nevada Peace Officer's Bill of Rights (POBR), codified at NRS 289.060, required a ranked peace officer to conduct such investigations.

The Eighth Judicial District Court of Clark County granted summary judgment in favor of the respondents. The court determined that the City violated the Nevada Peace Officer's Bill of Rights by allowing a human resources employee to lead the investigation. The court declared that the City must ensure a peace officer conducts any interrogation or hearing in connection with such investigations and enjoined the City from using non-peace officers for these tasks.

The Supreme Court of Nevada reviewed the case and affirmed the district court's decision. The court held that NRS 289.060(2)(d) requires a ranked peace officer to lead any investigation that could result in punitive action against another peace officer. The court found that the term "officer" in the statute refers to a peace officer based on legislative history, statutory context, and public policy considerations. The court concluded that the City of Las Vegas violated the statute by having a human resources employee lead the investigation and upheld the district court's order granting summary judgment for declaratory and injunctive relief.

USE OF FORCE

**Heredia v. Roscoe**
US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
January 6, 2025
Docket: 23-1353

*LEO LAW Topics** 8-1, 9-12**:** Officer was **not entitled to qualified immunity because it was clearly established that increasing the use of force after an arrestee had submitted was unconstitutional.*

In the early hours of May 11, 2018, Chasrick Heredia was at the “GlowBar” nightclub celebrating his birthday with his brother, Joshua, and friends. When Joshua was directed to leave the club due to his behavior, Chasrick and his friends accompanied him and argued with the bouncer when Manchester Police officers arrived. At some point, Officer Roscoe grabbed Chasrick from behind and forced him against a car. When Chasrick spun around, the officer threw him to the ground. Chasrick Heredia filed a §1983 federal civil suit alleging excessive force and other constitutional violations. 

The United States District Court for the District of New Hampshire presided over the initial trial. The jury found in favor of Heredia on the excessive force claim against Roscoe but in favor of the defendants on all other claims. Roscoe's post-trial motions for a judgment as a matter of law (JMOL) and remittitur were denied by the district court, which concluded that a reasonable juror could find that Roscoe violated Heredia's constitutional rights and that qualified immunity did not apply.

On appeal, the First Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of Roscoe's motions, holding a reasonable jury could find that Roscoe used excessive force when he performed a takedown on Heredia after Heredia had submitted to arrest by raising his hands. The court also held that Roscoe was not entitled to qualified immunity because it was clearly established that increasing the use of force after an arrestee had submitted was unconstitutional. Additionally, the court found that the punitive damages awarded were justified based on Roscoe's reckless indifference to Heredia's constitutional rights.

**Manery v Lee**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
January 7, 2025
Docket: 24-1292

*LEO LAW Topics **8-3, 9-12**: **Officer’s shooting at fleeing suspect’s vehicle was not clearly established as unreasonable use of deadly force such as to preclude a grant of qualified immunity.*

On April 10, 2021, at approximately 3:36 p.m., Lieutenant Lee, a reserve deputy sheriff for Marion County, Indiana, heard a dispatch request to execute an out-of-state arrest warrant for William Manery from Rutherford County, Tennessee. The team proceeded to an apartment complex in Broad Ripple where, according to information received from Tennessee authorities, they would find Manery. In the parking lot, the team discovered the Jeep that the Tennessee authorities suspected Manery was driving. Deputy White and Lieutenant Lee parked their vehicles on either side of the Jeep to block it. Deputy White approached the driver’s side of the Jeep while Lieutenant Lee approached the passenger’s side. They found Manery sleeping in the car. With his service revolver and flashlight drawn, Deputy White woke Manery by yelling repeatedly, “Show me your hands” and “Do not move.” Lieutenant Lee struck the passenger window with his service revolver. Manery put his hands in and out of his pockets, then started the Jeep. He placed the Jeep in reverse and, despite hitting Deputy White’s car, continued to reverse. Lieutenant Lee pursued him on foot. The Jeep hit a curb, stopped briefly, and then moved forward. In this forward trajectory, the Jeep then hit Deputy Wilcox’s car. Within seconds of the collision, Lieutenant Lee opened fire. He fired five shots, paused briefly, then fired four more through the driver’s side door. He hit Manery in the arm, hip, chest, and stomach. The entire encounter unfolded in less than a minute.

Manery filed a lawsuit under 42 U.S.C. §1983 in Indiana state court against Lieutenant Jason Lee and other defendants, alleging that Lee used excessive deadly force in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The case was removed to the United States District Court for the Southern District of Indiana. Lee moved for summary judgment, claiming qualified immunity, but the district court denied the motion, citing genuine issues of material fact. The district court acknowledged that Lee knew Manery was wanted for serious crimes and believed he was armed and had threatened "suicide by cop." However, the court found that factual disputes about the threat level at the time Lee fired his weapon precluded summary judgment. The court assumed, without deciding, that Lee might have violated Manery's constitutional rights but concluded that the issue of whether the law was clearly established was intertwined with these factual disputes, necessitating a jury's resolution.

On appeal, the Seventh Circuit noted that Lee accepted Manery's version of the facts for the appeal. The court emphasized that qualified immunity protects officers unless they violate clearly established rights that a reasonable officer would know. The court found that the cases cited by Manery did not clearly establish that Lee's use of deadly force was unreasonable under the specific circumstances. Given the rapidly evolving situation and the information Lee had, the court concluded that a reasonable officer in Lee's position would not have known that using deadly force was a violation of Manery's rights. Accordingly, the Seventh Circuit reversed the district court's denial of qualified immunity and remanded the case for further proceedings consistent with its opinion.
