---
source: "BF 19APR2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

**Muldrow v. City of St. Louis**
United States Supreme Court
601 U.S. ___ (2024)
April 17, 2024

LEO LAW Topic: An officer challenging a transfer on Title VII grounds does not have to show a "materially significant disadvantage."

Sergeant Jatonya Muldrow is a police officer in the St. Louis Police Department. She alleged that she was transferred from her position in the Intelligence Division to a uniformed job in another department because of her gender. Despite maintaining her rank and pay, the transfer significantly altered Muldrow's responsibilities, perks, and schedule. She filed a Title VII suit against the City of St. Louis, claiming that the transfer constituted sex discrimination regarding her employment terms and conditions.

The District Court granted the City summary judgment, and the Eighth Circuit affirmed, holding that Muldrow had to show that the transfer caused her a "materially significant disadvantage." The courts ruled that since the transfer did not result in a reduction to her title, salary, or benefits and only caused minor changes in working conditions, Muldrow's lawsuit could not proceed.

The United States Supreme Court disagreed with the lower court's interpretation of Title VII. The court held that an employee challenging a job transfer under Title VII must show that the transfer brought about *some harm* regarding a term or condition of employment, but that harm need not be *significant*. The court rejected the City's arguments based on statutory text, precedent, and policy. It vacated the judgment of the Eighth Circuit, remanding the case for further proceedings under the correct Title VII standard. The court clarified that Muldrow only needed to show some injury respecting her employment terms or conditions, not that the harm was significant.

**Meinecke v. City of Seattle**
US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
No. 23-35481
April 18, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic 9-**8**: Arrest violates First Amendment rights (not content-neutral)*

Matthew Meinecke, a devout Christian, was arrested twice by Seattle police for refusing to move from public locations where he was reading Bible passages. The first incident occurred at an abortion rally, and the second at an LGBTQ pride event. In both instances, Meinecke was ordered to move after attendees began to assault him physically. Meinecke refused. Instead of dealing with the perpetrators, the police arrested Meinecke for obstruction. Meinecke sued the City of Seattle and certain Seattle police officers, seeking to prevent them from enforcing "time, place, and manner" restrictions and applying the City's obstruction ordinance to eliminate protected speech in traditional public fora whenever they believe individuals opposing the speech will act hostile toward it.

The United States District Court for the Western District of Washington denied Meinecke's motion for preliminary injunctive relief, reasoning that the officers' actions were content-neutral and did not aim to silence Meinecke. 

On appeal, the United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit reversed the district court's decision. The Ninth Circuit held that Meinecke has standing to pursue prospective injunctive relief, given that the City has twice enforced its obstruction ordinance against him. Meinecke has stated that he will continue his evangelizing efforts at future public events, and the City has communicated that it may file charges against him for doing so. The court found that Meinecke established a likelihood of success on the merits of his First Amendment claim. The restrictions on his speech were content-based heckler's vetoes, where officers curbed his speech once the audience's hostile reaction manifested. Applying strict scrutiny, the court held that there were several less speech-restrictive alternatives to achieve public safety, such as requiring protesters to take a step back, calling for more officers, or arresting the individuals who ultimately assaulted Meinecke. The court also held that Meineke established irreparable harm because a loss of First Amendment freedoms constitutes an irreparable injury, and the balance of equities and public interest favors Meinecke. The case was remanded with instructions to enter a preliminary injunction consistent with this opinion in favor of Meinecke.

**United States ****v****. Ramirez**
US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
No. 22-50045
April 18, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic 10-4: Questions regarding probation status are mission-related activities that do not impermissibly prolong a traffic stop.*

Police officers stopped Victor Ramirez for traffic violations. They recognized Ramirez as a gang member from a previous encounter, and one of the officers asked him about his parole status. Ramirez confirmed he was on parole for a firearm-related offense. During the stop, the officers discovered a loaded firearm in Ramirez's car. Ramirez was indicted for possessing a firearm and ammunition as a convicted felon.

Through his attorney, Ramirez filed a motion to suppress the gun and ammunition, arguing that the officers unreasonably prolonged the stop by asking about his parole status, which he claimed was unrelated to the traffic stop. The district court denied Ramirez's motion to suppress, and Ramirez pleaded guilty to possessing a firearm and ammunition as a felon, reserving his right to challenge the denial of his motion to suppress.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court held that asking about parole status during a traffic stop does not violate the Fourth Amendment as it reasonably relates to the officer's safety and imposes a negligible burden. 

**Bustillos v. City of Artesia**
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
No. 22-2046
April 17, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic 9-8: Officer lacked reasonable suspicion required to demand identification, making the arrest a Fourth Amendment and First Amendment violation. *

Albert Bustillos, who classifies himself as an "independent journalist," was filming content for his YouTube channel outside the Navajo oil refinery in Artesia, New Mexico. While filming, he was approached by refinery security and later by officers from the Artesia Police Department, including Corporal David Bailey. Despite Bustillos asserting he was on public property and had not broken any laws, Bailey arrested him for failure to identify himself in violation of New Mexico law.

Bustillos sued Bailey and the City of Artesia, alleging violations of his First and Fourth Amendment rights and New Mexico law. The defendants moved for summary judgment, arguing that Bailey was entitled to qualified immunity. The district court denied the motion, rejecting Bailey's qualified immunity defense.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity. The court found that Bailey lacked reasonable suspicion of a predicate crime required to lawfully arrest someone for concealing identity. The court also found that Bustillos had met his burden to show that Bailey violated his clearly established Fourth Amendment rights. 

**U****nited ****S****tates**** v. Evans, **
US Court of Appeals for the DC Circuit
No. 22-3024
April 16, 2024

LEO LAW - NOT FOR PUBLICATION - Officer Credibility

Deangelo Evans was a passenger in a car pulled over for traffic violations by the United States Park Police. During the stop, the Park Police frisked Evans and found a firearm in his waistband. Evans was arrested and charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm. Evans moved to suppress the firearm, arguing that the firearm was discovered through an unlawful search in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The district court denied his motion, ruling that the pat-down frisk was justified due to the bulge in his pants that the officers reasonably believed might be a gun. Evans was convicted, but preserved his right to appeal the district court's denial of his motion to suppress the firearm as evidence. Evans appealed.

The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit had to determine whether the district court erred in crediting the police officers' testimony that they initiated a Terry frisk only after they saw a bulge in Mr. Evans's pants that they believed might be a gun. Evans argued that the officers' testimony was inconsistent and implausible. However, the appellate court found that the inconsistencies Evans identified were not so glaring that the police officers' testimony must be a fabrication. Therefore, the court affirmed the district court's decision, ruling that the protective pat-down search was justified and the firearm was admissible as evidence.

Chaney-Snell v. Young 
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
No. 22-1990
April 15, 2024
LEO LAW Topics 8-1 and 8-5: Court rejects de minimus force argument and considers the failure to intervene.
Deputy Andrew Young and Officer Andrew Teichow arrested Kamel Chaney-Snell during a search of his girlfriend's house. Chaney-Snell claimed that after he peacefully surrendered, Young punched him in the face, and one of the officers kneed him in the back and dragged him across the floor. He sued Young and Teichow under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging excessive force and failure to intervene. The district court denied qualified immunity to both officers. The officers appealed, and the Sixth Circuit affirmed in part and reversed in part.
The court first considered whether the Fourth Amendment allows officers to use unnecessary force on arrestees if the force qualifies as "de minimis." The court noted that Young and Teichow conceded that, under Chaney-Snell's allegations, one of them gratuitously kneed him in the back and dragged him on the floor. They nevertheless argued that this force falls below the minimum level required for an excessive-force claim. The court held that gratuitous force violates the Fourth Amendment even if the force is minor and causes no serious injury.
The court then considered whether Chaney-Snell established a "failure to intervene" theory of liability. The court noted that Officer Teichow did not have a realistic opportunity to stop each quick and discrete action of Deputy Young. The district court decided to treat all actions as a single continuous use of force, but the Sixth Circuit noted that their caselaw does not clearly establish that decision. The court found that qualified immunity protected Officer Teichow from the failure-to-intervene claims.
An interesting quote from the case is, "Perhaps one day we will have to identify the source of this failure-to-intervene claim when deciding its proper scope... But today is not the day." The court provides a great discussion on the source of the cause of action for the duty to intervene.

**Tanner v. Walters **
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
No. 22-1963 
April 15, 2024 

*LEO LAW Topic 9-4: Detective not entitled to qualified immunity on claims of fabrication of evidence.*

Hattie Tanner filed a civil lawsuit against David Walters, a retired police detective, alleging that he violated her constitutional rights by falsifying investigation reports and providing false testimony, leading to her wrongful conviction. Walters sought summary judgment based on qualified immunity, which the district court partially granted and partially denied. The court allowed Tanner's claims for fabrication of evidence and malicious prosecution to proceed to trial. Walters appealed this decision, arguing that he was entitled to qualified immunity.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court found that a reasonable jury could conclude that Walters knowingly fabricated evidence against Tanner. Thus, he was not entitled to qualified immunity for Tanner's fabrication-of-evidence claim. The court also found that a reasonable jury could find that Walters's false statements influenced the decision to charge Tanner and that without these false statements, there would not have been probable cause to prosecute Tanner. Therefore, Walters was not entitled to qualified immunity on Tanner's malicious prosecution claim.

**Lewis v. Caraballo **
US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
No. 22-2115 
April 15, 2024

LEO LAW Topic 8-1, 9-4

In 2018, Maryland State Trooper Kevin Caraballo used force while arresting 15-year-old Cameron Lewis. Lewis sued Caraballo for excessive force and battery. Caraballo sought summary judgment, arguing he was entitled to qualified and statutory immunity. The district court denied his motion, leading to this appeal.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court found that there were disputes of material fact that precluded summary judgment. Specifically, a reasonable jury could find that Caraballo struck Lewis when the teenager did not pose a threat, was not actively resistant, and was subdued. The court held that Lewis's constitutional right to be free from excessive force in the form of head strikes was clearly established at the time of his arrest. 

**P****erez v. City of Fresno**** **
US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
No. 22-15546 
April 15, 2024

LEO LAW Topic 9-4

Joseph Perez died after law enforcement officers, under the direction of a paramedic, used their body weight to restrain him while he was in a prone position to secure him to a backboard for transport. The family sued the City and County of Fresno, individual law enforcement officers, and the paramedic, alleging violations of the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments and municipal liability under Monell v. Department of Social Services of the City of New York.

The District Court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants, finding that the officers and the paramedic were entitled to qualified immunity. The court held that at the time of Perez's death in 2017, the law did not clearly establish that the officer's actions would be unconstitutional. The court dismissed the plaintiffs' Monell claims, finding insufficient evidence that the City and County were deliberately indifferent to their duty to properly train their officers. The estate of Perez appealed this decision.

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court held that the law did not clearly establish, nor was it otherwise obvious, that the officers' actions, directed by medical personnel, would violate Perez's constitutional rights. The court also held that the plaintiffs produced insufficient evidence to support their municipal liability claim against the City and the County based on a failure-to-train theory.
