---
source: "22 BF 28MAY2021.docx"
tags:
  - Terry-Stop
  - Seizure-of-a-Person
  - cellphone-seizure
  - automobile-exception
  - Use-of-Force
  - Deadly-Force
  - Qualified-Immunity
  - Use-of-Force
  - Intermediate-Force
  - Taser
  - Traffic-Stop
---

22 BF 28MAY2021

**United States v. Mabry   21May2021**

> **Areas of Law:** Terry Stop, Seizure of a Person

Uniformed Metropolitan Police officers Goss, Tariq, and Volcin were patrolling an area known for gun- and drug-related crime when they saw three men hanging out on the sidewalk. When they exited their car to talk to them, one man began to walk away and Officer Goss approached him. Mabry, the defendant in this case, and the third man stayed. The man who tried to leave became irate as Officer Goss spoke with him. Officer Tariq walked over and patted the man down. Officer Volcin stayed with Mabry and the third man. Seeing the pat-down, Mabry raised his shirt and said, “I’ve got nothing,” and “you have no probable cause to search me.” Officer Volcin asked about a satchel Mabry was carrying. The officers requested that he open the satchel. Mabry repeatedly said that he had nothing. Officer Volcin never grabbed Mabry or the satchel and never told Mabry that he could not leave. At this point, Mabry ran and during the ensuing chase, Mabry discarded the satchel, which Officer Goss recovered. Mabry eventually stopped and Officer Volcin opened the satchel and discovered a spring for a large-capacity magazine. While walking, Mabry made unsolicited statements indicating he was in possession of a firearm and drugs. Mabry had a pistol, 30 rounds of ammunition, an extended magazine, crack cocaine, and amphetamines. The D.C. Circuit reversed the denial of Mabry's motion to suppress. Mabry was “seized” for Fourth Amendment purposes. The circumstances show the officers’ conduct constituted a show of authority to which Mabry submitted.

To read or download the full decision 

 

**People v. Tousant**   CACOA   26MAY2021

> **Areas of Law:** cellphone seizure, automobile exception

Tousant was convicted for his part in the shooting of several individuals and his unlawful possession of firearms. Tousant appealed the denial of his motion to suppress evidence downloaded from his cellphone which was seized after an allegedly illegal search of his car which was left at the scene of a shooting. Tousant also appealed the admission of his incriminating statements to a police officer, admission of uncharged acts, denial of a motion to sever, and a response to a jury question. The court of appeal affirmed, rejecting those arguments and a claim the evidence supporting three convictions was insufficient. The search and seizure were justified under the automobile exception because there was probable cause to believe the cellphone would contain evidence related to the shooting. Furthermore, law enforcement’s 15-day seizure of Tousant’s cellphone before securing a warrant to search its contents was not unreasonable. Regarding the incriminating statements, the court held Tousant did not require Miranda warnings because he was not interrogated. 

To read or download the full decision 

 
USE OF FORCE

**Banks v. Hawkins**   8thCIR   27MAY2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, Deadly Force, Qualified Immunity

The defendant in this civil suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983 was a police officer who shot the plaintiff while investigating a potential domestic disturbance, The plaintiff alleged the officer used excessive force in violation of the Fourth Amendment. The district court denied the officer's motion for summary judgment for qualified immunity. The Eighth Circuit affirmed, agreeing with the district court that genuine issues of material fact precluded a grant of qualified immunity. The plaintiff's demeanor and conduct are in dispute. Furthermore, the officer opened the door and instantaneously shot plaintiff. Therefore, under these circumstances, it is reasonable for a jury to conclude that no reasonable officer would have believed that he had probable cause to use deadly force. Furthermore, plaintiff's right to be free from excessive force under these circumstances was also clearly established at the time.

To read or download the full decision 

 

**Masters v. Runnels****   **8thCIR   27MAY2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of Force, Intermediate Force, Taser, Traffic Stop

Plaintiff filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging that defendant, a police officer, used excessive force against him during a traffic stop. A jury found in favor of plaintiff, awarding compensatory and punitive damages. Defendant appealed. The Eighth Circuit concluded that, viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the verdict, defendant's prolonged use of his taser was not an objectively reasonable use of force. In this case, although plaintiff initially resisted defendant's attempts to remove him from the car, he did not physically hit or verbally threaten defendant. Furthermore, plaintiff, who was 17 years old at the time, posed at most a minimal safety threat to defendant. The court also concluded that plaintiff's right to be free from excessive, prolonged use of a taser was clearly established at the time. Accordingly, the court affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion for judgment as a matter of law on the prolonged taser claim. 

To read or download the full decision
