---
source: "BF45 8NOV2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF45 8NOV2024 

**United States v. Jackson**
US Court of Appeals for the Third Circuit
November 6, 2024
Docket: 23-1707

*LEO LAW Topic**s 5-2, 5-13, 6-7:** **The Terry Stop of a suspected stolen vehicle in a high crime area at night was lawful, as was the Terry Frisk of the driver and subsequent search of the automobile after the driver stated that there were firearms in the vehicle. **        *

At about 0100 on October 2, 2019, Officer McCauley was patrolling with an unarmed trainee when he noticed a car with a broken taillight, a damaged license plate, and an expired registration. Suspecting the car was stolen, he attempted to stop it, but the driver evaded him. About forty minutes later, McCauley spotted the car again. After a U-turn and a brief pursuit, he conducted a "felony stop" of the vehicle in a dark, secluded area. The occupants were ordered out at gunpoint, handcuffed, and frisked. A gun magazine was found on Jackson, who then admitted to having a gun in the car. At this point, officers searched the car and found another firearm and items linked to recent robberies.

Before the trial, Jackson sought to suppress the evidence found, arguing that his Fourth Amendment rights were violated. The district denied the motions to suppress, finding the stop, frisk, and search of the automobile lawful. The court determined that the officers' actions were justified by the circumstances, including the time of night, the high-crime area, and the suspects' evasive behavior. The court also found that the officers had probable cause to search the vehicle based on Jackson's admission about the firearm and the smell of marijuana.

On appeal, Jackson and Martins conceded that the officers had reasonable suspicion to initiate a Terry stop of their vehicle. Still, they argued that the officers executed the stop in an unreasonable manner by holding them at gunpoint, forcing them to kneel, handcuffing them, and frisking Jackson when the officers had no reason to believe that any of the suspects were armed and dangerous. The Third Circuit disagreed. The court emphasized that the officers were justified in taking these precautions due to the nature of the suspected crime, the suspects' behavior, and the environment. The court concluded that the measures taken, including ordering the occupants out at gunpoint and using handcuffs, did not violate the Fourth Amendment.

**United States v. House**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
November 5, 2024
Docket: 23-1950

*LEO LAW Topic**s 2-4, 2-9: The thirteen-month continuous use of a pole camera to surveil the front of a dwelling was not a search under the Fourth Amendment (refusing to apply mosaic theory).**     *

The defendant in this criminal action, Charles House, was suspected of being involved in drug trafficking activities, traveling to California to obtain large quantities of marijuana and methamphetamine, which he then shipped to addresses in Indiana. In October 2018, FedEx personnel alerted law enforcement to suspicious packages addressed to various locations in Anderson, Indiana. A drug-sniffing dog indicated that five of the twelve packages contained drugs, leading to a state warrant and the discovery of methamphetamine and marijuana. In January 2019, law enforcement put up a pole camera pointing at the front of House’s residence, allowing it to record footage continuously until February 5, 2020. The pole camera captured only video and could be viewed live or reviewed later. When watching the recording live, officers could zoom in or pan out the camera to aid in the investigation. An investigating officer later testified that he monitored the pole camera daily during the thirteen months that the camera was operating. As a result of this video surveillance, law enforcement identified several behavior patterns in the pole camera footage. This and other patterns were the basis for obtaining flight and delivery records that linked House to those shipments. The pole camera footage also allowed the government to identify a confidential informant, who agreed to help establish House’s role in selling drugs.

Before the trial, the House sought to suppress any evidence obtained due to the use of video surveillance under the “mosaic theory” discussed in *United States v. Jones*, 565 U.S. 400 (2012). The district court denied House’s motion to suppress the pole camera evidence, relying on the precedent set in *United States v. Tuggle*, which held that the warrantless use of pole cameras does not constitute a search under the Fourth Amendment. House was found guilty on all counts, including drug distribution and possession of a firearm by a convicted felon, and was sentenced to 360 months in prison. 

On appeal, the Seventh Circuit reaffirmed *U**nited States** v Tuggle*. It held that the warrantless use of pole cameras to observe a home does not amount to a search under the Fourth Amendment. Applying the Katz privacy intrusion analysis, the court held House did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the activities at the front of his home that were observable from public thoroughfares. Accordingly, the court affirmed the district court’s denial of House’s motion to suppress the pole camera evidence.

**STATE CASES**

**State v. Thomas**
Supreme Court of Missouri
November 5, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **10-3: The driver’s actions during a traffic stop gave the officer a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity that permitted the extension of a traffic stop. **        *

In the early morning, a police officer stopped Chad Thomas for driving with a broken headlight. During the stop, Thomas exhibited unusual behavior, such as rolling down the rear window instead of the front, being unable to find his driver’s license, and acting nervously. The officer conducted a pat-down search, during which Thomas mentioned he might have a "sharp," a term the officer associated with drug use. Thomas's behavior, including blocking the officer's view and lying about having his license, led the officer to call for a canine unit, which eventually alerted to the presence of drugs.

The Circuit Court of Saline County denied Thomas's motion to suppress the evidence found during the search, concluding that the officer had reasonable suspicion to extend the stop based on Thomas's behavior. The court found that the extension of the stop was justified by Thomas's actions, the need to verify his identity, and the outstanding warrant. The court admitted the evidence, and the jury found Thomas guilty of possession of a controlled substance and unlawful possession of drug paraphernalia. Thomas was sentenced to 10 years in prison.

On appeal, the Supreme Court of Missouri affirmed the circuit court’s judgment, holding the officer had reasonable suspicion to extend the traffic stop based on the totality of Thomas's behavior, which included nervousness, evasive actions, and inconsistent statements. 

**USE OF FORCE**** CASES**

**Benfer v. City of Baytown**
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
November 1, 2024
Docket: 23-20543

*LEO LAW Topic**s 6-7,** **8-4, 10-2: The traffic stop and subsequent arrest were lawful, as was the use of a K-9 to subdue the person resisting arrest.**        *

Officer Barry Calvert pulled over Benjamin Benfer and his wife for allegedly running a red light, and because their vehicle appeared to match the description of a car that had been reported as stolen. After pulling Benfer over, Calvert immediately exited his patrol car. Benfer also got out of his car and walked toward Calvert, ignoring commands to stop. As Benfer neared Calvert, Calvert tried to restrain him, but Benfer repeatedly broke free of Calvert’s grasp and ignored even more commands. During their tussle, Calvert warned Benfer that he had a dog that would bite Benfer if he continued to resist. During their struggle, Mrs. Benfer began approaching Calvert. At that time, and in a move to subdue Benfer, Calvert pushed him to the ground. Mrs. Benfer reacted by rushing toward and pushing Calvert. Calvert pushed her off, shouted at her to “back up,” and called for an assist from his K-9.

The K-9 bit and subdued Benfer while Calvert handcuffed Mrs. Benfer. Then, after handcuffing Mrs. Benfer, Calvert returned to his car for a second pair of handcuffs before walking over to Benfer. Held by Calvert’s K-9, Benfer had fallen to the ground. But, when Calvert attempted to hand-cuff Benfer, Benfer struggled, putting his hands behind his back. Calvert’s bodycam footage does not make clear whether Benfer resisted, or whether the K-9’s biting Benfer’s arm impeded his movement. While attempting to handcuff Benfer, Calvert commanded his K-9 to release its bite, but the K-9 maintained its hold. Instead, after finally handcuffing Benfer, Calvert had to pull the K-9 off of him.

Benfer filed a lawsuit against Calvert and the City of Baytown under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and state law, claiming violations of his constitutional rights and state tort claims. The United States District Court for the Southern District of Texas dismissed the case, ruling that Calvert did not violate Benfer’s constitutional rights, that Benfer’s state tort claims were not valid under Texas law, and that Benfer did not provide sufficient facts to support his claims against the City under Monell v. Department of Social Services.

The Fifth Circuit affirmed, holding that Calvert had reasonable suspicion to stop Benfer and probable cause to arrest him for resisting arrest. Regarding the use of force claim, the court held that Calvert’s decision to release his K-9 was a constitutional use of force. Furthermore, the court held that Calvert’s use of the K-9 to subdue Benfer until he was handcuffed was also a constitutional use of force.

**Swinford v. Santos**
US Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit
November 4, 2024
Docket: 22-13675

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **8-3, 9-4:** **The court properly used body-worn camera video to determine that the use of deadly force was objectively reasonable. **             *

Thomas Swinford was shot and killed by Athens-Clarke County police officers after he refused to drop a gun and instead raised and pointed it at the officers. His widow, Jayne Swinford, filed a lawsuit in Georgia state court alleging excessive use of force under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Georgia’s wrongful death statute against seven officers, the police chief, and the county government. The case was removed to federal court.

The defendants moved to dismiss the complaint on qualified and official immunity grounds, relying on body-worn camera footage showing the events leading up to the shooting. Over the plaintiff’s objection, the district court considered the body-worn camera footage. It granted the motion to dismiss, finding that the officers acted reasonably and did not violate Thomas’s constitutional rights.

On appeal, the Eleventh Circuit determined that the district court correctly considered the body camera footage under the incorporation-by-reference doctrine. The footage showed that the officers had probable cause to believe Thomas posed a serious threat when he raised his gun at them, justifying their use of deadly force. The court found that the officers did not use excessive force and were entitled to qualified immunity. Since the excessive force claim failed, the supervisory liability claim against the police chief and the Monell claim against the county also failed.
