---
source: "53 BF 31DEC2021.docx"
tags:
  - Criminal-Law
---

53 BF 31DEC2021

United States v. Maglio

Court: US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit

Opinion Date: December 23, 2021

Search Warrant Sufficiency (Franks Hearing)

The First Circuit affirmed Defendant's conviction of possession with intent to distribute marijuana and possession of a firearm and ammunition by a convicted felon, holding that the district court did not err by not granting Defendant's motion to suppress. In his motion to suppress, Defendant sought to suppress evidence obtained after the execution of a search warrant at his residence, asserting errors and omissions in the underlying search warrant affidavit. The First Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of Defendant's motion, holding that the various motions that Defendant filed ultimately seeking to suppress the evidence seized from his residence were correctly denied.

Commonwealth v. Sweeting-Bailey

Court: Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court

Docket: SJC-13086

Opinion Date: December 22, 2021

Terry Frisk during traffic stop (RS PAAD)

The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed Defendant's convictions entered upon his conditional guilty plea to the charges of possession of a firearm without a license and possession of a large capacity feeding device, holding that the superior court did not err in denying Defendant's motion to suppress. On appeal, Defendant argued that the officers that stopped him after a routine traffic stop and then conducted a pat frisk did not have reasonable suspicion that he might be armed and dangerous. The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed the order denying Defendant's motion to suppress, holding that the facts, when taken together, warranted a reasonably prudent person's belief that Defendant was armed and dangerous.

State v. Smith

Court: Montana Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 MT 324

Opinion Date: December 28, 2021

Driveway has REP under Montana law (decided without 4th Amendment)
No "hot pursuit" for exigency to enter driveway (citing Lange)

The Supreme Court reversed the order of the district court denying Defendant's motion to suppress evidence obtained when law enforcement officers entered Defendant's private property without a warrant, holding that that the State did not prove exigent circumstances permitting a warrantless search. At issue was whether Defendant had a reasonable expectation of privacy in his residence's driveway when he told a sheriff's deputy, who was attempting to effectuate a traffic stop, that he was trespassing and needed a warrant and whether exigent circumstances existed to allow the sheriff's deputy to conduct a warrantless investigation on the property. The Supreme Court held (1) the deputy sheriff properly entered the driveway when he already had initiated a traffic stop but exceeded his authority after Defendant asked him to leave; and (2) Defendant's failure to stop for a minor traffic violation did not create an exigency allowing the deputy sheriff to conduct a warrantless investigation after Defendant invoked his right to privacy.

Oregon v. McCarthy    30DEC2021   OR SCt

No Automobile Exception without exigent circumstances under state law

Defendant Charles McCarthy moved to suppress evidence that law enforcement officers obtained during a warrantless search of a truck. Defendant had been driving the truck when officers stopped it for a traffic violation. During the stop, the officers developed probable cause to believe that the truck contained contraband. Although the stop occurred on a weekday afternoon near the county courthouse and the officers had mobile phones and a computer, the officers did not attempt to contact a magistrate to obtain a warrant to search the truck. Instead, they searched it without a warrant. At the time of the search, the truck was lawfully parked in a parking lot and defendant had been arrested. In his motion to suppress, defendant argued that the warrantless search was unconstitutional. The state argued the warrantless search of the truck was justified under the “automobile exception” to the warrant requirement. The trial court rejected the state’s argument, reasoning that the automobile exception was premised on the existence of exigent circumstances, and the state had failed to prove that exigent circumstances existed at the time the officers searched the truck. The state appealed, and the Court of Appeals reversed on the ground that, under Oregon v. Brown, 721 P2d 1357 (1986), exigent circumstances were presumed to exist if a vehicle was mobile when it was stopped by the police, regardless of whether there was an actual exigency after that point. Applying Brown’s “ 'per se exigency rule,’” the Court of Appeals held that all the state was required to show was that the truck was mobile at the time it was stopped by the officers and that the officers had probable cause to search it. The Oregon Supreme Court overruled Brown’s per se exigency rule and held that, in order to justify a warrantless seizure or search of a vehicle based on exigent circumstances, the state had to prove that exigent circumstances actually existed at the time of the seizure or search. Because the state did not do so here, the Supreme Court concluded the trial court correctly granted defendant’s motion to suppress.

Pennsylvania v. Barr

Court: Supreme Court of Pennsylvania

Docket: 28 MAP 2021

Opinion Date: December 29, 2021

Smell of marijuana could not create PC to conduct warrantless automobile search since PA passed law making possession legal in certain circumstances.

As a result of a vehicle search, the Commonwealth discovered a bag of marijuana and a firearm. In connection with these items, the Commonwealth charged Appellant Timothy Barr, II with: persons not to possess a firearm, possession of a firearm without a license, and possession of a small amount of marijuana. Appellant filed an omnibus pretrial motion, which included a motion to suppress the physical evidence gathered by police during the search, and a petition for a writ of habeas corpus, contending that the Commonwealth could not establish a prima facie case that Appellant possessed a small amount of marijuana or committed the firearm offenses. The trial court granted the motion to suppress and granted in part the petition for a writ of habeas corpus, dismissing the count of possession of a small amount of marijuana. The Pennsylvania Supreme Court granted allowance of appeal in this matter to examine to what extent, if at all, the smell of marijuana could be considered when determining whether law enforcement had probable cause to conduct a warrantless search of a vehicle. This issue arose in light of the Pennsylvania General Assembly’s enactment of the Medical Marijuana Act, which legalized the possession and use of marijuana in limited circumstances, and the Court’s recent decision in Commonwealth v. Hicks, 208 A.3d 916 (Pa. 2019), which addressed whether police could stop and frisk a person merely based on the fact that the person possessed a concealed firearm in public. Like the Superior Court, the Supreme Court held that the smell of marijuana could be a factor, but not a stand-alone one, in determining whether the totality of the circumstances established probable cause to permit a police officer to conduct a warrantless search of a vehicle. The Court disagreed with the Superior Court’s decision to remand the matter to the trial court for reconsideration of its order granting the motion to suppress filed by Timothy Barr, II (“Appellant”). Instead, that portion of the Superior Court's decision was vacated, the trial court's judgment reinstated (granting Appellant’s motion to suppress), and remanded for further proceedings.

United States v. Meals

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 20-40752

Opinion Date: December 30, 2021

Judge: Edith H. Jones

> **Areas of Law:** Criminal Law

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress evidence of sexually explicit Facebook chats with an underage minor on the ground that Facebook and NCMEC are government agents. The court concluded that defendant failed to carry his burden of showing that Facebook is a government agent or instrument, and thus the private search doctrine applies. The court also concluded that later investigative techniques employed by NCMEC and government officials did not impermissibly expand the scope of the original search.
