---
source: "26 BF 25JUN2021.docx"
tags:
  - hot-pursuit
  - exclusionary-rule
  - probable-cause
  - good-faith
  - Traffic-Stop
  - Permissible-Questions
  - Mission-Related-Activities
  - Extended-Stop
  - K-9
  - Search-and-Seizure
  - Trash-Pull
  - Physical-Intrusion
  - Curtilage
  - Search-and-Seizure
  - Trash-Pull
  - Abandoned-Property
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - DUI
  - eyewitness
  - corroboration
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - DUI
  - anonymous-tip
  - corroboration
  - Miranda
  - Public-Safety-Exception
  - Kidnapping
  - Search
  - Hotel-Room
  - Eviction
  - Plain-View-Seizure
  - Search-Incident-to-Arrest
  - Use-of-force
  - warrantless-search
  - home-entry
  - taser
  - unlawful-arrest
---

26 BF 25JUN2021

Lange v. California    SCt   23JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** hot pursuit

Lange drove by a California highway patrol officer, playing loud music and honking his horn. The officer followed Lange and soon turned on his overhead lights to signal Lange to pull over. Rather than stopping, Lange drove a short distance to his driveway and entered his attached garage. Without obtaining a warrant, the officer followed Lange into the garage, questioned him, and, after observing signs of intoxication, put him through field sobriety tests. Charged with misdemeanor DUI, Lange moved to suppress the evidence obtained after the officer entered his garage. California courts rejected his Fourth Amendment arguments. The Supreme Court vacated. Under the Fourth Amendment, the pursuit of a fleeing misdemeanor suspect does not always justify a warrantless entry into a home. Precedent favors a case-by-case assessment of exigency when deciding whether a suspected misdemeanant’s flight justifies a warrantless home entry. Such exigencies may exist when an officer must act to prevent imminent injury, the destruction of evidence, or a suspect’s escape. Misdemeanors may be minor. When a minor offense (and no flight) is involved, police officers do not usually face the kind of emergency that can justify a warrantless home entry. Adding a suspect’s flight does not change the situation enough to justify a categorical rule. When the totality of circumstances (including the flight itself) show an emergency—a need to act before it is possible to get a warrant—the police may act without waiting. Common law afforded the home strong protection from government intrusion and did not include a categorical rule allowing warrantless home entry when a suspected misdemeanant flees.

United States v. Caesar   10thCIR   23JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** exclusionary rule, probable cause, good faith

Pennsylvania State Police received a tip about suspicious eBay activity and discovered several messages, seeking to buy children’s used underwear and posing as a child looking for photos of other children in their undergarments. The username was registered to “Robert Caesar” of Oxford, PA. Other information corroborated Caesar’s connection to the eBay account. While the investigation was ongoing, Officer Gallina received information that Caesar had sexually abused two adolescent brothers. After interviewing the boys, Gallina applied for warrants to search for evidence of aggravated indecent assault of a minor, seeking physical evidence of the alleged sexual abuse, consisting of “[s]emen and bodily fluid,” and images of child pornography stored on personal electronic devices. Although the supporting affidavit included no express allegations that Caesar possessed child pornography, it stated that child abusers “routinely keep” such images. During the ensuing search, officers seized electronic equipment. A third warrant authorized the search of those devices, which contained child pornography. The Third Circuit reversed, in part, the suppression of thousands of images of child pornography and of Caesar’s sexual abuse victims. Whether they were enough to satisfy probable cause, the allegations about Caesar’s prolonged sexual abuse of the brothers and his interest in photos of undressed children supported the reasonableness of the officers’ belief that probable cause existed. Gallina’s reliance on the initial warrant and his conduct securing the warrant did not approach the gross negligence required to trigger the exclusionary rule.

United States v. Leal   7thCIR   21JUN2021
Tag: Custody, Miranda

Leal used an online dating application to contact a user who was an undercover FBI agent, posing as a teenage boy. Despite learning that the user was underage, Leal engaged in sexually explicit conversations and solicited oral sex. The agent provided Leal an address. Under surveillance, Leal arrived at the house. When a surveillance officer drove an unmarked vehicle up the alley, Leal sped off. Leal was quickly pulled over. Three officers were present, wearing clothes that identified them as officers. Leal was told that he was not under arrest and agreed to speak with other agents in the house. Leal consented to a pat-down and surrendered his cell phone and his car keys. The recorded interview proceeded with the door closed. The agents neither handcuffed nor restrained Leal. Leal quickly confessed and confirmed he had sent the messages. After the 18-minute interview, the FBI arrested Leal for knowingly attempting to entice a minor to engage in sexual activity. The Seventh Circuit reversed the grant of Leal’s motion to suppress his statements. The agents did not conduct a custodial interrogation without advising him of his Fifth Amendment rights. The custody inquiry is not whether the defendant was under a subjective belief that his movements were restricted, but whether a reasonable person in the defendant’s position would believe that he was free to leave. That Leal believed he was in a precarious position says nothing about the officers' behavior or whether a reasonable person would have felt bound to stay.

Idaho v. Hale   IDSCt   22JUN2021   

> **Areas of Law:** Traffic Stop, Permissible Questions, Mission Related Activities, Extended Stop, K-9

William Hale, II, appealed after he was convicted on two counts of felony possession of a controlled substance and one count of possession of drug paraphernalia. After a drug-detecting dog alerted on the car Hale had been driving, law enforcement conducted a warrantless search of the vehicle, discovering various controlled substances and drug paraphernalia. Hale moved to suppress the evidence resulting from the search, arguing that the responding officer had impermissibly prolonged the stop while waiting for the drug-detecting dog by inquiring about Hale’s permission to operate the vehicle. The district court denied Hale’s motion, reasoning that the officer’s questions were within the permissible scope of the traffic stop. The Court of Appeals affirmed, concluding that the questions regarding Hale’s permission to operate the vehicle comported with the Fourth Amendment. Finding no reversible error in the district court decision, the Idaho Supreme Court affirmed judgment.

State v. Hahn   IASCt   18JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Search and Seizure, Trash Pull, Physical Intrusion, Curtilage

The Supreme Court conditionally affirmed Defendant's drug-related convictions, second offense, holding that, consistent with this Court's opinion in State v. Wright, __ N.W.2d __ (Iowa 2021), filed today, law enforcement officers conducted an unreasonable seizure and search when they seized and searched garbage bags left out for collection without first obtaining a warrant. On appeal, Defendant argued that two sheriff's deputies violated his federal and state constitutional rights to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures when they seized and searched a trash bag outside Defendant's residence without first obtaining a warrant. The Supreme Court agreed, holding that remand was required in order for the district court to hold a hearing on Defendant's motion to suppress evidence without consideration of the evidence and information obtained during a trash pull used to support their warrant application.

State v. Wright   IASCt  18JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Search and Seizure, Trash Pull, Abandoned Property

*** EXCELLENT DISCUSSION OF FOURTH AMENDMENT HISTORY – 123-page decision***

The Supreme Court conditionally affirmed Defendant's convictions and remanded for the district court to hold a hearing on Defendant's motion to suppress evidence, holding that the peace officer in this case conducted an unreasonable search and seizure by taking a citizen's opaque trash bags left outside for collection, opening the trash bags, and rummaging through the papers and effects contained therein. Despite an ordinance making it unlawful for any person to take solid waste placed out for collection, Officer Brandon Heinz, without probable cause or warrant, took Defendant's garbage bags and searched through them during the dark of night. Heinz subsequently applied for and was granted a search warrant based on the evidence obtained from the warrantless seizure and search of Defendant's trash bags. Defendant was subsequently charged with several drug-related counts. The district court denied Defendant's motion to suppress, and Defendant was found guilty. The court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court held that Heinz conducted an unreasonable search and seizure in violation of Iowa Const. art. I, 8 and that remand was required for a suppression hearing without consideration of the evidence obtained during the trash pulls used to support the warrant application.

North Dakota v. Van Der Heever   NDSCt   24JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Reasonable Suspicion, DUI, eyewitness, corroboration

The State appealed a district court order granting Marco Van Der Heever’s motion to suppress evidence, arguing the officer had reasonable suspicion to stop Van Der Heever’s vehicle. Van Der Heever was charged with driving under the influence of intoxicating liquors. He moved to suppress the evidence obtained as a result of his vehicle being stopped by law enforcement. The district court held a hearing, where Sergeant Cory Mortensen provided the sole testimony. Mortensen testified he was contacted by dispatch to respond to a possibly impaired driver at approximately 12:30 a.m. on June 28, 2020. Dispatch informed him that the reporting party, John Towes, stated a silver F-150 pickup was traveling on Central Avenue in Walhalla, North Dakota, stopping and reversing in the middle of the road. Towes reported the driver’s actions caused him to stop and reverse his vehicle to avoid being hit by the F-150. Mortensen testified that Central Avenue was the road between the two bars in Walhalla, and that Towes reported the F-150 was parked “up town at the local bar all afternoon.” Mortensen stated that he was personally familiar with Towes from prior community contacts. After receiving Towes’ phone number from dispatch, Mortensen called him. Towes identified the driver as male and believed he was probably impaired. Towes did not know where the F-150 was located at that time, but called back shortly after and said the vehicle was parked on 7th Street, just north of Delano Avenue. Towes was parked down the road, watching the F-150, and he told Mortensen the driver of the F-150 was outside of his parked vehicle. After the suppression hearing, the district court granted Van Der Heever’s motion to suppress, concluding that Mortensen should have corroborated some of Towes’ report before stopping Van Der Heever’s vehicle. The North Dakota Supreme Court concluded the district court misapplied the law when it concluded Mortensen needed to further corroborate Towes’ information. Under the totality of the circumstances, Mortensen had reasonable suspicion of criminal activity, and the court erred by granting Van Der Heever’s motion to suppress evidence.

State v. Tidwell   OHSCt   24JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Reasonable Suspicion, DUI, anonymous tip, corroboration

The Supreme Court reversed the judgment of the court of appeals upholding the order of the municipal court granting Defendant's motion to suppress, holding that the police officer's investigatory stop of Defendant was reasonable and thus did not violate the Fourth Amendment. At issue was whether the officer had reasonable suspicion to briefly detain Defendant in order to confirm or dispel an unidentified witness's claim that Defendant was operating a motor vehicle while intoxicated. The trial court granted Defendant's motion to suppress. The court of appeals affirmed, holding that the officer lacked the reasonable suspicion necessary to effectuate a lawful investigatory stop because the anonymous tip lacked sufficient indicia of reliability and because there was no evidence of erratic driving by Defendant prior to the stop. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that the officer had reasonable suspicion to investigate whether Defendant was driving while drunk based on the unidentified customer's tip and the officer's own partial corroboration of that tip.

Texas v. Mata   TXCCA   23JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Miranda, Public Safety Exception, Kidnapping

A fifteen-year-old girl was kidnapped. Appellee Ricardo Mata called the girl’s mother and demanded a ransom of $300 for her release. He said this was the amount he had “paid” for her. A sheriff's investigator posed as a friend of the mother to negotiate the trade. While on the phone, the investigator had Appellee's cell phone "pinged," and they were able to trace the phone's location. Appellee left the house in a vehicle, and the phone’s “pinged” location matched his movements. At some point Appellee mentioned that his battery was dying; investigators had a marked police car stop Appellee’s vehicle. Investigators arrived on the scene and questioned Appellee regarding the kidnapped girl. They did not administer Miranda warnings. One investigator immediately accused Appellee of being the kidnapper and said that “they got him.” After further “aggressive interrogation,” Appellee said he would help locate the girl if they let him go. The investigator responded that Appellee would not be free to leave. After continued interrogation, Appellee revealed the child’s location. Once she was found, Appellee was transported to the sheriff’s office. Appellee filed a motion to suppress statements made by him to law enforcement, contending the investigators did not give him Miranda warnings. The trial court agreed, suppressing any “statements alleged to have been made by [Appellee] at the time he was detained on the side of the road and in response to direct questioning from Investigator Porraz, Chavez, and or Deputy Canales.” The trial court found that Appellee was “not free to leave the side of the road” at the time he gave the roadside statements and that Miranda warnings had not been given. On appeal, the State argued that the roadside questioning fell within the public safety exception to the Miranda rule and that the resulting statements were admissible. The court of appeals disagreed, holding that the public safety “exception is a narrow one, and it has only been used in situations involving the use of guns.” The appellate court concluded that “the officers had no indication of a weapon or gun being involved or used to endanger the safety of the public,” and the court declined to construe the public safety exception more broadly because that “may lessen the clarity of the Miranda rule.” The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals reversed both the trial and appellate courts, finding the "public safety" exception to Miranda extended to attempts to find a kidnapped child.

Tilghman v. Texas   TCCCA   23JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Search, Hotel Room, Eviction, Plain View Seizure, Search Incident to Arrest

After hotel management smelled marijuana smoke coming from a guest room, a hotel employee knocked on the door in an attempt to evict the guests. After this attempt was unsuccessful, a manager later requested police assistance with evicting the guests. In assisting with the eviction, police entered the hotel room and witnessed drugs in plain view. Police then arrested the occupants of the room, conducted a search of the room incident to arrest, and seized the drugs. Appellant Michael Tilghman appealed his ultimate conviction, arguing police's entry into his rented room violated his reasonable expectation of privacy in the room. The Texas Court of Criminal Appeals reversed the court of appeals, which held the trial court erred in failing to grant Appellant's motion to suppress evidence of the drugs.

USE OF FORCE

Gerling v. Waite   8thCIR   23JUN2021

> **Areas of Law:** Use of force, warrantless search, home entry, taser, unlawful arrest

Plaintiff filed suit against a police officer under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging that the officer unlawfully arrested him and used excessive force during the arrest. Plaintiff's claims stemmed from an incident where the officer issued tickets to him for illegal parking and resisting arrest. Plaintiff pleaded guilty to illegal parking by signing the ticket at the police station, and the City later dismissed the charge of resisting arrest. The Eighth Circuit affirmed the denial of summary judgment on plaintiff's unlawful arrest claim where there is a genuine dispute of material fact about whether the officer entered plaintiff's home without a warrant to effect the arrest. In regard to plaintiff's separate Fourth Amendment claim premised on the alleged use of excessive force, the court concluded that the officer is entitled to qualified immunity because an officer could reasonably believe that plaintiff was resisting arrest. The court explained that, under the circumstances, it was not clearly established at the time that officers were forbidden to use force, including a taser, to arrest a suspect who resisted, ignored instructions, and walked away from the officer. The court noted that any damages that plaintiff suffered because of his arrest are subsumed within his unlawful arrest claim. Therefore, even without a freestanding claim for use of excessive force, plaintiff may recover any damages that he suffered from the officer's use of a taser if plaintiff succeeds on his claim alleging unlawful arrest based on an unjustified entry into the home.
