---
source: "BF 28 12JULY2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

B.F. 28 12JULY2024

**S****EARCH AND SEIZURE ****EVIDENCE ****SUPPRESSION CASES**

**United States v. Cortez**
US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
July 11, 2024
Docket: 23-1029

*LEO LAW Topic **1-5, 4-1, 4-2**:** The search warrant affidavit was supported by probable cause, and the lack of showing false statements or omissions in the affidavit precluded a Franks hearing.*

Damian Cortez was part of a Massachusetts gang known as "NOB" and was involved in various criminal activities, including drug trafficking. Charged with conspiracy and possession with intent to distribute controlled substances, Cortez sought to suppress evidence seized from an apartment in Attleboro, Massachusetts, and from two cell phones seized under two search warrants. Cortez argued that the affidavit supporting the search warrant for the apartment did not establish probable cause that he was involved in a RICO conspiracy or that he resided there. He also requested a Franks hearing, claiming that the affidavit contained false statements and omissions. The district court found that the affidavit provided sufficient probable cause and denied the request for a Franks hearing.

The First Circuit held that the affidavit established probable cause to believe that Cortez was involved in a RICO conspiracy and that he resided in the Attleboro apartment. The court noted that the affidavit included evidence from G.P.S. data, photographic evidence, and direct observations linking Cortez to the apartment. The court also found that Cortez did not make a substantial preliminary showing that the affidavit contained false statements or omissions required to order a Franks hearing. Therefore, the court upheld the denial of the motion to suppress and the request for a Franks hearing.

**United States v. Chatrie**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
Docket: 22-4489
July 9, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **2-8**:**  The defendant had no privacy in the location information that he knowingly gave to a third party. Therefore, the government did not conduct a search when it obtained this information from Google.*

On May 20, 2019, someone robbed the Call Federal Credit Union in Midlothian, Virginia. The suspect carried a gun and took $195,000 from the bank's vault. He then fled westward before the police could respond. Unable to identify the suspect from security footage and witness interviews, the police obtained a "geofence warrant" to access Google's historical location data. This data revealed that Okello Chatrie's phone was close to the bank during the robbery. Chatrie was subsequently indicted and moved to suppress the evidence obtained via the geofence warrant.

The district court denied Chatrie's motion to suppress, citing the good-faith exception to the exclusionary rule. Chatrie entered a conditional guilty plea and was sentenced to 141 months imprisonment and three years supervised release. He appealed, arguing that the geofence warrant violated his Fourth Amendment rights and that the court should suppress the evidence seized under the warrant.

The Fourth Circuit held that Chatrie did not have a reasonable expectation of privacy in the two hours' worth of Location History data voluntarily exposed to Google. Therefore, the government did not conduct a Fourth Amendment search when it obtained this information from Google. The court rejected Chatrie's argument that the geofence warrant violated his Fourth Amendment rights, stating that he voluntarily exposed his location information to Google by opting into Location History. The court also noted that the information obtained was far less revealing than evidence obtained in previous cases involving long-term surveillance. Accordingly, the Fourth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of the motion to suppress.

*Editor**'**s Note:** Just days after the Fourth Circuit heard oral arguments on this case, **Google **decided to **no longer retain the location data sought in **"**geofence warrants**"**; **therefore the **privacy **issue**s** of geofencing location data **were rendered moot**.*

**United States v. Nkongho**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
July 10, 2024
Docket: 22-4261

*LEO LAW Topic **5-23**:**  Seizure of a cell phone at the border was lawful under border exception, and a nine-day delay in obtaining a warrant to search the cell phone was not unreasonable.*

Eunice Nkongho was investigated for her involvement in a munitions export and money laundering conspiracy. Federal agents stopped her at the airport and seized her electronic devices. Nine days later, they obtained a warrant to search her phone, uncovering incriminating text messages. Nkongho was charged with money laundering and conspiracy to launder money. She moved to suppress the evidence from her phone, but the district court denied Nkongho's motion to suppress, holding that the seizure of her devices fell within the border search exception to the warrant requirement. The court also rejected her argument that the nine-day delay in obtaining a search warrant was unreasonable, emphasizing the government's heightened interest in the devices.

On appeal to the Fourth Circuit, the court recognized that the Supreme Court has long held that border agents need no warrant, nor any individualized suspicion, to conduct routine searches of the persons and effects of entrants. The court noted that the justification behind the border search exception is broad enough to accommodate not only the direct interception of contraband as it crosses the border but also the prevention and disruption of ongoing efforts to export contraband illegally. The court held that the seizure of her devices was lawful under the border search exception and that the nine-day delay in seeking a search warrant was not unreasonable. 

**United States v. Sanders**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
July 9, 2024
Docket: 22-4242

*LEO LAW Topic **4-2, 4-6**:** The digital **search warrant was supported by probable cause, the information was not stale, and **the defendant** was not entitled to a Franks hearing.*

On February 12, 2020, the F.B.I. executed a search warrant at the residence of Zackary Sanders to search for evidence of child pornography based mainly on digital evidence obtained from overseas that indicated Sanders used a T.O.R. website to distribute child pornography. Sanders was charged with multiple offenses related to the illegal production, receipt, and possession of child pornography. 

Sanders sought to suppress evidence seized pursuant to a search warrant for his residence and statements he made to F.B.I. agents during the search of his residence. The district court denied the motions to suppress, and Sanders was convicted. 

On appeal to the Fourth Circuit, the court found that the search warrant was supported by probable cause, the information was not stale, and that Sanders was not entitled to a Franks hearing. 

**United States v. Avila**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
July 9, 2024
Docket: 22-3231

*LEO LAW Topic**s 5-25, 5-27,** **10-2, 10-4**:  **The traffic stop was valid at its inception and was not unlawfully prolonged by conducting multiple frisks of the passenger and a protective sweep of the vehicle.**   *

On June 17, 2020, Chicago police officers were proactively policing Chicago's west side as part of a gang violence suppression tactical team, specifically looking for members of the Satan's Disciples and Latin Kings. Refugio Avila, a member of Satan's Disciples, was sitting in the passenger seat of a minivan parked in front of a restaurant when he was spotted by one of the officers walking into the restaurant to buy a beverage. When the driver returned to the minivan and departed, the police officers followed. When the officers observed a failure to indicate (a traffic violation), they conducted a pretextual traffic stop of the car. The officers knew Avila was affiliated with Satan's Disciples and observed him sifting in his seat during the traffic stop. When ordered out of the vehicle, and without prompting by the officers, Avila raised his hands, spread his legs, and turned to face the minivan. At this point, officers frisked Avila and did a "protective sweep" of the minivan and found nothing. Avila was frisked two more times, and on the third frisk, the officers discovered a loaded handgun hidden in a "hernia bandage." Avila was charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm.

Avila filed a motion to suppress the firearm. Avila asserted two independent bases to suppress the handgun under the Fourth Amendment. First, he argued that the officers lacked reasonable suspicion to stop Hernandez, so the stop was not justified at the outset. Second, he argued that the officers unnecessarily prolonged the stop by removing him from the car, asking him questions unrelated to the traffic stop, and improperly searching him three times. The district court denied both motions. Avila entered a conditional plea to the felony charge, reserving his right to challenge the district court's denial of his motions.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court's ruling on the motion to suppress. First, the court ruled that the traffic stop was valid at its inception based on the traffic violations observed. Second, the court held that the Terry Frisks of Avlia was supported by a reasonable suspicion he was armed and dangerous. The court noted that there is no "one and done" rule regarding Terry Frisks. Furthermore, the frisks were a mission-related activity while attending the traffic stop; therefore, the traffic stop was not unlawfully prolonged. 

**Bougher v. Silver Cross Hospital and Medical Centers**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
July 11, 2024
Docket: 22-2108

*LEO LAW Topic **1-1**:**  Actions of a private hospital in taking temporary custody of a child were not government actions such as to trigger Fourth Amendment scrutiny.*

Three sets of parents refused to allow their newborns to receive Vitamin K shots at private hospitals in Illinois due to concerns about risks and religious reasons. Hospital staff reported the refusals to the Illinois Department of Children and Family Services (DCFS), which investigated the parents for medical neglect. In one case, hospital staff took temporary protective custody of the child. The parents sued under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging violations of their Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment rights by the hospitals and medical professionals.

The United States District Court for the Northern District of Illinois dismissed the cases, ruling that the private entities were not engaged in state action and thus not liable under § 1983. The parents appealed the decision.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit reviewed the case. The court held that the private hospitals and their staff did not act under the color of state law. The court found no evidence of a conspiracy or joint action between the hospitals and DCFS to infringe on the parent's constitutional rights. The court also determined that the hospitals were not performing a public function traditionally reserved to the state, as the mere threat of taking protective custody did not constitute state action. Additionally, the court found no symbiotic relationship or entwinement between the hospitals and the state to the point of largely overlapping identity. Accordingly, the Seventh Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal of the parents' claims, concluding that there could be no § 1983 liability without state action.

*Companion Case:** ****Scott v. University of Chicago******, ****US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit*
*July 11, 2024**, **Docket: 22-2096*

**STATE ****APPELLATE COURT DECISIONS**

**State v. Davis**
Montana Supreme Court
July 9, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic **3-6, 6-11**:**  **Handcuffing the suspect and transporting her to the station was a de facto arrest supported by probable cause and, therefore, lawful. Conducting field sobriety tests was not an "interrogation" for Miranda purposes; thus, no Miranda warning was required. *

On December 11, 2021, at around 1:00 a.m., Davis drove her vehicle off the left side of Rickett's Road in Ravalli County, striking several mailboxes. After striking the mailboxes, Davis crossed over the road and became high-centered on a rock berm. Davis left her vehicle and walked home. She returned to the accident in a different car. Officers responded to the scene after the accident, which was reported later that morning. At approximately 3:30 a.m., Trooper Barbera arrived and observed the knocked-down mailboxes and Davis's S.U.V. high-centered on a rock berm. He also observed a truck with a male driver and a female passenger, later identified as Davis, and an extension cord tied to the truck and S.U.V. Trooper Barbera detected alcohol on Davis' breath and asked what caused the accident, to which Davis replied, "Deer." Davis had red and watery eyes, and the officer detected the smell of alcohol from her vehicle. She admitted to having a drink after her shift at work. Due to adverse weather conditions, the officer decided to conduct standardized field sobriety tests (SFSTs) at the Sheriff's Office. Davis was handcuffed for transportation but was informed that she was not under arrest. After performing poorly on the SFSTs and a breath test at the Sheriff's Office, Davis was arrested for D.U.I.

Davis filed a motion to suppress, arguing that she was subjected to a custodial interrogation without being advised of her *Miranda* rights and that all evidence obtained after she was handcuffed should be suppressed. The state argued that the officer had particularized suspicion that Davis was driving under the influence. The District Court denied Davis's motion to suppress, reasoning that the officer had particularized suspicion to extend the stop at each step of his investigation.

The Montana Supreme Court concluded that, notwithstanding the trooper's assertions to the contrary, Davis was under arrest when placed in handcuffs, and there was probable cause to believe Davis had committed the offense of D.U.I. when she was placed in handcuffs and taken to the Sheriff's Office for testing. The court also found that Davis's Miranda rights were not violated as she was not subjected to a custodial interrogation. The court held that the results of the SFSTs and breath test did not require a Miranda warning as they were not self-incriminating statements that must be suppressed in the absence of a Miranda waiver.

**State v. Geno**
Montana Supreme Court
July 9, 2024

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **7-6**, 7-13**:** **The Officer's false assertion that they were not there to arrest the suspect did not render the Miranda waiver involuntary, and the Miranda warning was sufficient to waive the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, which had attached before the second interview.*

On the morning of January 26, 2020, the Roosevelt County Sheriff's Office received a report of an unresponsive adult woman inside Geno's apartment in Culbertson, Montana. Deputy Baker responded to the scene and summoned emergency medical personnel, who identified the woman as Ramona Naramore and determined she was deceased. An autopsy revealed Naramore's cause of death was strangulation. Her boyfriend, Geno, was questioned twice, once on January 31 and again at his home on February 19. On February 19, officers went to Geno's home with an arrest warrant, yet they told Geno they were not there to arrest him. Geno was Mirandized and said he understood his rights, agreed to waive them, and signed a written Miranda form. Geno was subsequently charged with homicide.

In the lower courts, Geno moved to suppress his statements from an interview with law enforcement, asserting that they were obtained involuntarily in violation of his Fifth, Sixth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights. The District Court denied Geno's motion, finding that there was no inappropriate coercion and that Geno's statements were voluntary. Geno's case proceeded to trial, where the jury found him guilty of deliberate homicide.

In the Supreme Court of the State of Montana, Geno argued that his statements to law enforcement officers should have been suppressed as involuntary under the Fifth Amendment and that his second custodial interrogation violated his right to counsel under the Sixth Amendment of the United States Constitution. The court affirmed the lower court's decision, finding that the officer's false assertion that they were not there to arrest him did not render Geno's statements involuntary under a totality of the circumstances. Furthermore, the court held that the Miranda waiver was sufficient to waive the Sixth Amendment right to counsel that had attached when charges were filed before the second interview. 

*Editor**'**s Note: This case provides a good refresher on the distinction between the Fifth Amendment right to counsel and the Sixth Amendment right to counsel, along with a reminder that the Miranda waiver suffices for both.*

**USE OF FORCE ****AND OFFICER LIABILITY**

**Boyle v. Azzari**
US Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit
July 9, 2024
Docket: 23-1107

*LEO LAW Topic **8-3, 9-4**:** **D**iscoverable evidence could create a material dispute of fact** **that would preclude qualified immunity on summary judgment for the use of deadly force.*

On April 13, 2021, Trooper Azzari responded to a report of a suspicious man with a gun at 23260 Hollywood Road. Azzari was only a tenth of a mile away and responded without activating lights or siren. Azzari arrived at "23270 Hollywood Road, Leonardtown, M.D. 20650," the house next door to the reported location. Still without activating his police lights or sirens, Azzari drove his vehicle into the driveway of 23270 Hollywood Road which was in a "U-shape" that wrapped around the back of the house. He then stopped his car in the driveway, behind the house, and out of view of Hollywood Road.

Upon exiting the car, Azzari saw Peyton Alexander Ham, who had walked onto the property at 23270 Hollywood Road by then. Azzari believed Ham was holding a gun in his right hand and that Ham pointed the gun at him. However, the object in Ham's hand was not a real gun but a replica of a Sig Sauer. Unaware of that fact then, Azzari fired at least eleven rounds at Ham. At least one of those shots struck Ham. Azzari then reloaded his gun with another full magazine of ammunition. He yelled and screamed at Ham while moving around the area, at least once getting close enough to Ham to touch him. As he was moving about the area, Azzari noticed that Ham had a knife in his possession and an injury to his right arm. At some point, at least 57 seconds after Azzari shot Ham, he stopped approximately fifteen to twenty-five feet away from Ham, who was on his knees. Azzari faced Ham from that distance with his gun drawn and pointed at Ham. Azzari then fired four additional shots at Ham, striking him multiple times. Ham collapsed from his knees and dropped face forward to the ground. He eventually succumbed to his injuries caused by the gunshot wounds. Azzari did not activate his lights, sirens, or the in-car camera in his patrol vehicle at any time before or during the encounter.

Ham's mother, Kristee Ann Boyle, acting as the representative of his estate, filed a lawsuit against State Trooper Joseph Charles Azzari Jr. for excessive force under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and for assault, battery, and intentional infliction of emotional distress under Maryland state law. The district court denied Boyle's request for additional time for discovery and granted Azzari's pre-discovery motion for summary judgment. The court determined that the evidence Boyle sought could not create a triable issue of fact regarding her claims and held that Azzari was entitled to summary judgment because his actions were reasonable even under Boyle's proffered account of the relevant events.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit disagreed with the lower court's decision. The appellate court concluded that discoverable evidence could create a material dispute of fact, and thus, the district court abused its discretion in denying Boyle an opportunity to conduct discovery. The court did not assess the lower court's determination on the merits but reversed its denial of Boyle's motion for discovery, vacated its grant of summary judgment to Azzari as premature, and remanded the case for additional proceedings.

**Terrell v. Harris County**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
July 9, 2024
Docket: 23-20281

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **1-1, 9-4**:** **An o**ff-duty officer working **a **side job in uniform was a government actor, and the plaintiff failed to point to legal precedent that puts the wrongfulness of the officer**'**s actions **"**beyond debate**,** such as to prevent qualified immunity.*

The plaintiff (Terrell) alleged that two deputies from the Harris County Sheriff's Office forced her into a patrol car, and one of them sexually assaulted her. As permitted by agency policy, the deputies were off-duty but were in uniform and using patrol vehicles while working a side job at a bar. Terrell woke up the following day at home with pain in her vaginal area and no memory of having sex. A DNA test revealed that semen in her underwear matched one of the deputies, Michael Hines. Hines was charged with sexually assaulting Terrell.

Terrell sued Deputy Hines, Deputy Cannon, Harris County Sheriff Ed Gonzalez, and Harris County under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. The district court dismissed her claims against Cannon, Gonzalez, and Harris County for failing to state a claim. Terrell appealed the dismissal.

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court found that the officers were government actors. The court further held that Terrell failed to point to legal precedent that puts the wrongfulness of the officer's actions "beyond debate" and therefore awarded qualified immunity for the officers. The court also found that the plaintiff failed to allege the type of "pattern of deliberate indifference" required to establish vicarious liability for the County or its Sheriff. The court concluded that Terrell's allegations were insufficient to show a failure-to-train policy or a widespread pattern of misconduct. Accordingly, the court dismissed Terrell's supervisory and municipal liability claims against Sheriff Gonzalez and Harris County.

**Verastique v. City of Dallas**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
July 8, 2024
Docket: 23-10395

*LEO LAW Topic **9-4**:** **The city's policy related to mass arrest was not unconstitutional on its face, and the city did not have **a persistent and widespread practice of failing to discipline its police officers that amounted to deliberate indifference**, such as to impose Monell liability**. **  *

The case involves a group of self-described "lawful and peaceful protestors" who sued the City of Dallas, Dallas County, and the Dallas County Sheriff's Office under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, seeking damages for alleged constitutional violations stemming from their participation in the George Floyd demonstrations in Dallas, Texas. The plaintiffs claimed that they were wrongfully arrested and mistreated by the police during the protests. They also alleged that the City of Dallas had a policy of failing to adequately discipline its police officers, which led to their constitutional rights being violated.

The district court dismissed the plaintiffs' claims against the City, the County, and the Sheriff's Office. The plaintiffs appealed the dismissal of their municipal liability claims against the city, arguing that the district court erred in doing so.

The United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's decision. The court found that the plaintiffs failed to show that the City of Dallas had a persistent and widespread practice of failing to discipline its police officers that amounted to deliberate indifference. The court also found that the plaintiffs failed to establish a causal link between the city's alleged failure to discipline and the violation of their rights. Furthermore, the court rejected the plaintiffs' claim that General Order 609.00, an official policy relating to mass arrests, was unconstitutional on its face. The court concluded that the policy did not affirmatively allow or compel unconstitutional conduct. Therefore, the court affirmed the dismissal of the plaintiffs' claims against the City of Dallas.

**Esco v. City of Chicago**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
July 9, 2024
Docket: 23-1304

*LEO LAW Topic **9-4**:** **B**ody-worn camera video provided definitive evidence that the officers had probable cause to arrest the plaintiff.*

Officers arrested Terrell Esco for weapons and drug violations. After the city dropped the charges, Esco filed a 42 U.S.C. §1983 civil suit alleging false arrest, unreasonable search, and unlawful detention in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights. Esco claimed that the officers knew he was not the person they saw in possession of a gun and that the officers' body-worn camera video evidence would support his claim. However, the district court judge viewed the video and held that the officers had probable cause to detain Esco, dismissing his claims.

On appeal to the Seventh Circuit, the court agreed with the district court's assessment that Esco failed to allege any plausible claims. The court noted that determining probable cause is based on an objective evaluation of what a reasonable officer could conclude based on information known to officers at the scene. The court found that the video provided definitive evidence that the officers had probable cause to believe that Esco was the person who possessed and then discarded the weapon.

**Socha v. City of Joliet**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
July 10, 2024
Docket: 23-2905

*LEO LAW Topic **4-6, 4-7, 4-8**:**  **Although** the** language of the digital search warrant was overly broad for the probable cause that existed, the officer sought the advice of the prosecutor and relied in good faith on the determination of a neutral magistrate and therefore qualified immunity was properly granted. **     *

Cassandra Socha, a patrol officer with the Joliet Police Department (J.P.D.), sent a text message to her neighbor criticizing her for testifying in the criminal trial of Socha's boyfriend. A prosecutor recommended that Sergeant Edward Grizzle secure a search warrant for Socha's cell phone, which he did, obtaining authority to search for any and all data related to electronic communications. Socha turned over her phone, expressing concerns about personal content. To search for the text message, J.P.D. detectives used forensic software called Cellebrite to extract all the data from her phone. They then saved the extracted data on the only computer that ran the software. Not long after the extraction, Socha heard rumors that people within the J.P.D. had seen explicit content from her phone. Two detectives admitted to viewing such content. The city asserted that the officer inadvertently accessed the photograph while opening random files to familiarize himself with and train on Cellebrite. 

Socha argued he opened her photograph intentionally and without proper authorization, and sued the City of Joliet, Sgt. Grizzle, and others, bringing multiple claims under federal and Illinois law. The district court granted summary judgment to Sgt. Grizzle on the § 1983 claim that her Fourth Amendment rights were violated, finding he was entitled to qualified immunity. 

On appeal, the Seventh Circuit agreed that Sgt. Grizzle was entitled to qualified immunity and affirmed the summary judgment on the § 1983 claim. First, the court noted that Sgt. Grizzle made no reckless, knowing, or intentional misrepresentation or omission in the warrant application. Socha contended that Sgt. Grizzle did so by misrepresenting the need to search such a broad variety of data and omitting from the application that it was possible to limit the search of her phone to only her text messages. But the court noted that there was no claim that Sgt. Grizzle lied about what he was searching for or where it might be found, and it is only with the benefit of hindsight that we know that his description of the places to be searched was broader than necessary. Second, the court held it is not a culpable omission to fail to state the obvious, ever-present possibility that the search could have been more limited. The court was concerned about the breadth of what was requested by the officers in the search warrant, but held that even if the warrant was overly broad, Sgt. Grizzle was entitled to qualified immunity because he conferred with a prosecutor before applying for a warrant and relied on the judge's issuance of the warrant in good faith. 

*Editor**'**s Note: Although the probable cause that existed was to search the cellphone for a single text message sent to a specific person on a specific day, the digital search warrant application**, in this case,** sought authorization to search: **"**any and all data regarding electronic communications, including dates and times of those communications, digital images or videos, e-mail, voice mail, buddy lists, chat logs, instant messaging or text accounts.**"** The Seventh Circuit was very uneasy with this and noted: **"**Given the stakes of cell phone searches, laid bare by what happened to Socha, we remind police of their obligation to be specific and explain why there is probable cause to search every part of a cell phone they seek to search.**"*

**Cuevas v. City of Tulare**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
July 10, 2024
Docket: 23-15953

*LEO LAW Topic**s** **8-3, 9-4**:** **Officer's use of force by releasing K9 and firing shots constituted a seizure, but qualified immunity was appropriate where it is not **clearly established that officers violated rights when they **accidentally hit a passenger** while defensively returning fire **at a vehicle **during an active shooting. **       *

Rosa Cuevas was a passenger in a car driven by Quinntin Castro, who led police on a high-speed chase. After getting stuck in the mud, police officers surrounded the vehicle, broke the window, and sent a police dog inside. Castro shot and killed the police dog and injured an officer. The officers returned fire, aiming at Castro but unintentionally hitting Cuevas multiple times. Castro died from his injuries, but Cuevas survived with severe injuries. Cuevas sued the City of Tulare and the involved officers under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging excessive use of force.

The district court granted summary judgment in favor of the defendants. The court found that Cuevas was not seized for Fourth Amendment purposes. Alternatively, the district court held that even if she were seized, the officers were entitled to qualified immunity because it was not clearly established that their use of force was excessive. 

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit held that Cuevas was seized under clearly established Fourth Amendment law. Castro was seized through the use of force when K-9 Officer Garcia put the K9 through the broken window, instructing him to bite Castro. The seizure continued when the officers fired at Castro after he shot the K9 and his handler. Regarding the qualified immunity question, the court held it was not clearly established that the force used by the officers was excessive. The court found that none of the cases cited by Cuevas clearly established that officers violated her rights when they shot her while defensively returning fire during an active shooting. The court also noted that in excessive-force cases where police officers face a threat, the "obviousness principle" will rarely be available as an end-run to the requirement that the law must be clearly established. Therefore, the officers were entitled to qualified immunity.

**Rosenbaum v. City of San Jose**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
July 11, 2024
Docket: 22-16863

*LEO LAW Topic **8-4, 9-4**:** **Genuine issues of material fact existed regarding using a police K9 to effectuate an arrest, such as to preclude qualified immunity on summary judgment.**    *

San Jose police officers used a police K9 to arrest Zachary Rosenbaum. During the arrest, the K9 allegedly bit Rosenbaum for over twenty seconds after he had surrendered and was lying prone on his stomach with his arms outstretched. Rosenbaum sued the City of San Jose and the officers involved under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming excessive use of force. He alleged that the prolonged dog bite caused severe lacerations and permanent nerve damage to his arm.

The district court denied the defendants' motion for summary judgment based on qualified immunity. The defendants appealed, arguing that the bodycam video contradicted Rosenbaum's allegations. However, the district court found that the video did not contradict Rosenbaum's claims and that whether the officers acted reasonably was a triable question for the jury.

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of qualified immunity. The court held that the bodycam video generally supported Rosenbaum's allegations and that a reasonable jury could find that the officers used excessive force. The court noted that it was clearly established in the Ninth Circuit that officers violate the Fourth Amendment when they allow a police dog to continue biting a suspect who has fully surrendered and is under officer control. Therefore, the court concluded that the officers were not entitled to qualified immunity and affirmed the district court's decision.

**Sheikh v. Department of Homeland Security**
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
July 5, 2024
Docket: 22-16983

*LEO LAW Topic **9-4**:** **Ninth Circuit refuses to create a Bivens action against federal agents for fabricating evidence in a search warrant application and submitting misleading reports to prosecutors.**   *

The case involves Dr. Firdos Sheikh, who brought Fourth and Fifth Amendment claims against former special agents with the Department of Homeland Security Investigations (H.S.I.). Dr. Sheikh alleged that the agents fabricated evidence in a search warrant affidavit and submitted misleading reports to prosecutors, leading to her arrest and criminal prosecution.

Previously, the district court dismissed Dr. Sheikh's claims. The court applied the two-step framework from Ziglar v. Abbasi to determine whether implied causes of action existed. The court held that Dr. Sheikh's claims presented a new context as they differed from cases where the Supreme Court implied a damages action. The court also found that several special factors indicated that the Judiciary was arguably less equipped than Congress to weigh the costs and benefits of allowing a damages action to proceed.

On appeal, the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal. The court agreed that Dr. Sheikh's claims presented a new context under Bivens and that special factors counseled hesitation in extending an implied cause of action. The court noted that the claims risked intrusion into the Executive Branch's prosecutorial decision-making process, were leveled against agents of H.S.I. who investigate immigration and cross-border criminal activity, and alternative remedial structures existed.

**Whitson v. Hanna**
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
July 5, 2024
Docket: 23-1084

*LEO LAW Topic **9-4**:** **W**hen an official takes action over which he or she has final policymaking authority**, then** the policymaker is the municipality** and **liability **can be imposed **on that entity for that action. **   *

Peatinna Biggs, an intellectually disabled prisoner, filed a civil rights suit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against Sedgwick County, the Sedgwick County Sheriff's Department, and Sheriff Hanna in his individual and official capacities, alleging that Sheriff Hanna sexually assaulted her while transporting her between county jails. The district court dismissed the complaint against the County and the Sheriff's Department, reasoning that the County could only be liable if the challenged conduct had been taken pursuant to a policy adopted by the official or officials. The court held that Hanna's actions were not pursuant to Department policies but in direct contravention of them. Hanna was then found liable by a jury in his individual capacity.

On appeal, the Tenth Circuit reversed the district court's decision that dismissed the complaint as to the County and the Sheriff's Department. The court held that Sheriff Hanna's actions fell within the scope of his policymaking authority regarding the custody and care of prisoners and subjected the municipal defendants to liability. The court reasoned that when an official takes action over which he or she has final policymaking authority, the policymaker is the municipality, so it is fair to impose liability on that entity for that action. The court concluded that given that Hanna raped a prisoner in his custody while transporting the prisoner to another jail, that requirement was undoubtedly satisfied.
