---
source: "BF 29OCT2021.docx"
tags:
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
---

United States v. Beard

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 20-20116

Opinion Date: October 22, 2021

Judge: W. Eugene Davis

> **Areas of Law:** Criminal Law

The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress drugs found in a package he mailed via the United States Postal Service from Houston, Texas, to Hammond, Louisiana. Defendant argued that his Fourth Amendment rights were violated, and an unlawful seizure occurred, when the package was rerouted back to Houston, which took five days, before law enforcement took further investigative steps to confirm their suspicion. However, the court agreed with the district court that the U.S. Marshal's choice to reroute the package back to Houston was reasonable and prudent under the facts of this case. The court also agreed that the five days the package was in transit from Hammond back to Houston, as well as the two days it took to obtain the warrant after the package returned to Houston, were not unreasonably long under the circumstances. In this case, the package had extensive connections to Houston and the U.S. Marshal requested that the package be rerouted to Houston because he believed that there was no difference in the time it would take to obtain a warrant in Houston versus Hammond.

Estate of Dillon Taylor, et al. v. Salt Lake City, et al.

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit

Docket: 19-4085

Opinion Date: October 26, 2021

Judge: Jerome A. Holmes

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Criminal Law

This case arose from the tragic death of Dillon Taylor, who was shot and killed by Salt Lake City Police Officer Bron Cruz. Officer Cruz and two fellow officers were following up on a 9-1-1 call reporting that a man had flashed a gun. The caller described the man and noted that he was accompanied by another male whom the caller also described. The officers attempted to stop Taylor and two male companions because two of the three men matched the caller’s descriptions. While Taylor’s companions immediately complied with the responding officers’ commands to stop and show their hands, Taylor did not. Instead, he made a 180-turn and walked away. Firearms in hand, but not pointed at Taylor, Officer Cruz and another responding officer followed Taylor. At some point, Taylor turned to face Officer Cruz, continuing to walk backwards with his hands in his waistband, "appeared to be digging there, as if Mr. Taylor was manipulating something." Then, without any verbal warning, Taylor quickly lifted his shirt with his left hand - exposing his lower torso -and virtually simultaneously withdrew his right hand from his waistband. The motion took less than one second and was consistent with the drawing of a gun. Reacting to Taylor’s rapid movement, Officer Cruz shot Taylor twice—firing in quick succession. Taylor died at the scene. When he was searched, Taylor was unarmed; in particular, he did not have a gun. Taylor’s estate and family members (collectively, “Plaintiffs”) filed this lawsuit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, asserting claims against Salt Lake City and Officer Cruz (and others). The question this appeal presented for the Tenth Circuit's review was whether Officer Cruz’s decision to shoot Taylor was reasonable based on the totality of the circumstances. Concluding that it was, the Tenth Circuit affirmed the district court's judgment.

Colorado v. McKay

Court: Colorado Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 CO 72

Opinion Date: October 25, 2021

Judge: William W. Hood, III

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Pursuant to a warrant, Denver police officers searched defendant Scott McKay’s home and car. During the search, police allegedly found more than four pounds of methamphetamine and a handgun. The State charged McKay with possession of methamphetamine with intent to distribute and possession of a weapon by a previous offender. In an interlocutory appeal of the trial court's order granting McKay's motion to suppress evidence gathered during the execution of that warrant, the State argued the trial court erred in finding the issuing magistrate’s probable cause determination lacked a substantial basis. The Colorado Supreme Court found the magistrate had a substantial basis to find probable cause existed. "Put simply, a fair probability existed that a search of McKay’s car and home would reveal contraband or evidence of a crime." Judgment was reversed and the matter remanded for further proceedings.

New Hampshire v. Davis

Court: New Hampshire Supreme Court

Docket: 2020-0167

Opinion Date: October 28, 2021

Judge: James P. Bassett

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant Daniel Davis appealed his conviction for one count of possession of a controlled substance with intent to sell, challenging a superior court order denying his motion to suppress evidence obtained during a warrantless entry into the enclosed porch of his residence and subsequent warrantless entry into the interior. He also argued the trial court erred when it did not suppress evidence seized during a subsequent search of his residence pursuant to a search warrant because the warrant was predicated upon evidence obtained during the two prior unlawful intrusions. The State contended that both entries were lawful and, therefore, the later warrant search of the defendant’s residence was also lawful. Because the New Hampshire Supreme Court agreed with defendant that the evidence obtained during the two warrantless entries was unlawfully acquired, and that the search warrant’s reliance on that evidence renders it invalid, it reversed and remanded.

North Dakota v. Kukert

Court: North Dakota Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 ND 192

Opinion Date: October 28, 2021

Judge: Daniel J. Crothers

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Wyatt Kukert appealed a district court judgment entered after he conditionally pled guilty to gross sexual imposition. Kukert argued on appeal that the trial court erred by denying his motions to dismiss and suppress. Kukert claimed he did not voluntarily waive his Miranda rights, and his statements to law enforcement were not corroborated by other evidence of sexual contact. Finding no reversible error, the North Dakota Supreme Court affirmed.

North Dakota v. Suelzle

Court: North Dakota Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 ND 194

Opinion Date: October 28, 2021

Judge: Jon J. Jensen

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Benjamin Suelzle was convicted by jury on one count of being in actual physical control of a motor vehicle while under the influence, and one count of refusal to submit to blood alcohol testing. On appeal, Suelzle argued the district court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence and dismiss the charges because the federal law enforcement officer who stopped his vehicle lacked reasonable and articulable suspicion that Suelzle had violated or was about to violate the law, and was without authority to detain him for the purpose of waiting for a McKenzie County law enforcement officer to arrive at the scene. Finding no reversible error, the North Dakota Supreme Court affirmed.

State v. Malloy

Court: Utah Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 UT 61

Opinion Date: October 21, 2021

Judge: Thomas R. Lee

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court in this criminal case repudiated the sweeping language of its opinion in State v. James, 13 P.3d 576 (Utah 2000), and held that it can no longer be said that it makes no constitutional difference, as regards community caretaking concerns, whether a police officer opens a car door or asks a driver to do so. Defendant was charged with felony DUI and possession of drugs and drug paraphernalia. Defendant moved to suppress the evidence discovered after an officer looked inside his pickup truck, which was parked in a store parking lot, opened the truck door, and saw evidence of drug paraphernalia between Defendant's feet. The district court denied the motion. The court of appeals affirmed on alternative grounds, holding that the officer was justified in opening the car door incident to a lawful traffic stop under the standard in James. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding (1) the identity of the door-opener may well affect the reasonableness of a given police encounter; and (2) the denial of Defendant's motion to suppress was proper under the authority of Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229 (2011)

Harmon v. City of Arlington

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit

Docket: 20-10830

Opinion Date: October 26, 2021

Judge: Edith H. Jones

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law

After an officer fatally shot O'Shea Terry, who was trying to drive his SUV away while the officer stood on the vehicle's running board, Terry's estate and Terrance Harmon, a passenger in the car, sued the officer under 42 U.S.C. 1983 for using excessive force. The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of summary judgment to the officer, concluding that plaintiffs did not plausibly allege an unconstitutional use of excessive force by the officer to rebut his qualified immunity. In this case, even if plaintiffs could allege sufficient facts showing a constitutional violation, they did not show that the officer violated any clearly established law that would place beyond doubt the constitutional question in this case, whether it is unreasonable for an officer to use deadly force when he has become an unwilling passenger on the side of a fleeing vehicle. Furthermore, Harmon's excessive force claim fails not only because the officer is entitled to qualified immunity, but also because, as a passenger, the officer failed to state a valid Fourth Amendment claim in his own right. Finally, because plaintiffs failed to allege a predicate constitutional violation by the officer, plaintiffs' municipal claims also failed.
