---
source: "BF 47 22NOV2024.docx"
tags:  []
---

BF 48 22NOV2024

**SIXTH CIRCUIT**

**United States v. Taylor**
US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit
November 15, 2024
Docket: 23-5344

*LEO LAW **Topic**  10**-2**:** The officer lacked reasonable suspicion to extend a traffic stop for a K9 sniff, and therefore, the firearm found during a search of the vehicle was suppressed.**      *

Officer Kristen Cox was part of a drug interdiction unit in Knoxville, Tennessee.  In that role, Officer Cox spent most of her time patrolling the interstate in the Knoxville, Tennessee, area “stopping cars all day long . . . looking for any narcotics or criminal activity.” In January 2019, Office Cox conducted a pre-textual stop of Nathaniel Taylor for doing 69 mph in a 55 mph zone on I-275. She approached Taylor’s car on the passenger side and requested a license and proof of insurance. She noticed air freshers on the gear shift. When asked where he was coming from, Taylor indicated he had just been at a job interview at Culvers.  She did not ask him where he was going. Taylor then provided his license but was having trouble finding the insurance. Officer Cox told Taylor he could keep looking for the insurance while she returned to her patrol car to write the ticket. 

Back in her patrol car, Officer Cox checked Taylor’s records and discovered that he had a criminal history involving weapons, assaults, and simple possession of drugs. Officer Cox also saw Taylor’s movements in the vehicle, consistent with looking for insurance. Taylor found documentation and waved it outside the driver’s side window. Officer Cox retrieved the insurance document, returned to her patrol car, requested a K9 unit, and then wrote a traffic citation. When the K-9 unit arrived several minutes later, Officer Cox removed Taylor from his vehicle and patted him down, and the dog sniff ensued. The dog indicated the presence of drugs in the car. A search of the car did not reveal any drugs, but the officers ultimately discovered a firearm in the trunk. Taylor was arrested and charged with being a felon in possession of a firearm.

Taylor moved to suppress the evidence found during the search, arguing, among other things, that there was no reasonable suspicion that Taylor was engaged in criminal activity when Officer Cox prolonged the stop. The district court denied Taylor’s motion to suppress. Taylor then conditionally pleaded guilty, reserving his right to appeal the district court’s ruling on the motion to suppress.

On appeal, the Sixth Circuit determined that Officer Cox did not have reasonable suspicion to prolong the traffic stop. Both parties agreed that the traffic stop was extended for the K9 sniff, so the court had to determine if a reasonable suspicion of drug transportation supported the extension. The court found that the factors cited by the officer, including Taylor’s travel plans, criminal history, air fresheners, and movements, did not collectively amount to reasonable suspicion. Accordingly, the court held that the officer’s extension of the stop to conduct a dog sniff was not supported by reasonable suspicion and reversed the district court’s denial of Taylor’s motion to suppress. 

**EIGHTH CIRCUIT**

**United States v. Virrueta**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
November 15, 2024
Docket: 23-3370

*LEO LAW Topics **5-13, 5-30, 10-2**:** The traffic stop was justified by a reasonable suspicion that the driver was driving on a suspended license, and the smell of raw marijuana created the probable cause to search the vehicle under both the automobile exception and the parole search exception. **          *

Officer Fischer of the Watertown Police Department received a call from an off-duty detective informing him that a female with extensive drug history and an unknown Hispanic male (Virrueta) attempted to make a suspicious wire transfer at a Walgreens drugstore. Fischer searched the parking lot for her white Cadillac but could not find it. Fischer later found her at her apartment complex parked next to a red Grand Pix registered to Virrueta’s mother. The two then left their vehicles and went into the woman’s apartment. Checking the database, Fischer identified Virrueta and learned he had a suspended license and was on parole for a drug offense.

Officer Fischer waited on a gravel road near the apartment, and an hour later, he observed the Cadillac, followed by the Grand Prix driven by Virrueta. He initiated a traffic stop of Virrueta for driving without a license. When he approached the vehicle, Officer Fischer smelled the strong odor of raw marijuana. Fischer then asked Virrueta to come to his patrol vehicle while a citation was completed. In the vehicle, Virrueta admitted to smoking marijuana an hour before the stop. Fischer called Virrueta’s parole agent, who recognized several parole violations. The officers then searched the Grand Prix under a parole search based on reasonable suspicion and found a methamphetamine mixture, marijuana, $3,000 cash, a glass pipe, and a digital scale. Virrueta was charged and challenged the validity of the traffic stop, the extension of the stop, and the search of the vehicle, arguing that the search was not supported by probable cause and that the consent given by his parole agent was invalid.

The district court denied Virrueta's motion to suppress. The court found that the initial traffic stop was valid based on reasonable suspicion and probable cause, as Corporal Fischer had identified Virrueta as driving without a valid license. The court also concluded that the extension of the stop was justified by the strong odor of raw marijuana emanating from the vehicle, which provided probable cause for the search. Additionally, the court upheld the search based on the consent given by Virrueta's parole agent, who had been informed of multiple parole violations.

On appeal, the Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's rulings, agreeing that the traffic stop was valid, the extension of the stop was justified by reasonable suspicion of additional criminal activity, and the search of the vehicle was supported by probable cause. The court also held that the parole agent's consent provided an independent basis for the search. 

**STATE CASES**

**MONTANA**

**State v. Stanley**
Montana Supreme Court
November 19, 2024

*LEO LAW Topics **1-7, 6-7**:** The Officer had a reasonable suspicion to initially stop an individual and then developed **separate reasonable suspicion to continue the detention, leading** to his arrest.**   *

On September 11, 2020, police received an anonymous tip that a person named Sobrepena, who had an outstanding warrant for his arrest, had been recently seen and staying in the vicinity of North 11th Avenue in Bozeman, Montana. In response to the tip, two Bozeman police officers were dispatched to the area to search for and apprehend Sobrepena. Based on the tip, dispatch advised that Sobrepena was wearing a red curly wig to conceal his identity from police and avoid arrest on the outstanding warrant.

While patrolling, one officer saw a lone man walking a bicycle eastward on the sidewalk who matched the tipster’s description of the fugitive Sobrepena insofar as he was an adult male wearing a distinctive bright red curly wig in that particular area. When officers approached the man, they realized he was not Sobrepena, but continued to approach him and asked where he got the red curly wig.  Once identified, officers discovered his name was David Stanley, and he had outstanding warrants. They arrested Stanley, and the jail intake search revealed Stanley had methamphetamine in his pocket. 

Stanley was convicted of felony criminal possession of methamphetamine. Stanley appealed, arguing that the District Court erred in denying his motion to suppress drug evidence found during a post-arrest jail intake search. The key issue was whether the police had the requisite particularized suspicion to justify the investigative stop that led to Stanley's arrest and the subsequent discovery of the drugs.

The District Court found that the police lacked particularized suspicion to justify the stop. However, it ruled that the "attenuation doctrine" exception to the exclusionary rule applied, meaning the drug evidence did not need to be suppressed despite the initial unlawful stop. Stanley then pled guilty under a plea agreement that reserved his right to appeal the suppression ruling.

On appeal, the Montana Supreme Court held that the police had a reasonable particularized suspicion to stop Stanley. The court noted that the police received an anonymous tip about a fugitive, Daniel Sobrepena, who reportedly wore a distinctive red curly wig to avoid arrest. When Officer Ahmann saw Stanley wearing a similar wig in the area described, it was reasonable to suspect he might be Sobrepena or have information about him. The court found that the initial stop and subsequent questioning were justified and conducted within a reasonable scope and duration. Accordingly, the court affirmed the denial of the motion to suppress, holding that the investigative stop was lawful and the resulting drug evidence was admissible.

**PENNSYLVANIA**

**Commonwealth v. Saunders**
Supreme Court of Pennsylvania
November 20, 2024

*LEO LAW Topics **5-13, 6-1**: **The observation of the firearm gave the officers probable cause to search the car under the automobile exception and seize the firearm under the plain view seizure doctrine. **       *

On the evening of November 18, 2020, Officer Ibbotson and Officer Washington stopped a silver Honda with heavily tinted windows in a high-crime area of Philadelphia for traffic violations. The driver, Omar Saunders, made suspicious movements, and Officer Ibbotson saw the handle of a gun under the driver’s seat. Saunders admitted he did not have a permit for the gun, which was later found to be stolen. Saunders was arrested, and the gun was seized. Sauders filed a motion to suppress, arguing Officer Ibbotson did not have the legal justification to reach into the car and seize the firearm at the time that he did.

The trial court denied Saunders’s motion to suppress the gun, ruling that the seizure was justified under the plain view doctrine and the automobile exception, which requires both probable cause and exigent circumstances. Saunders was convicted of firearms offenses and sentenced to three and a half to seven years in prison. The Superior Court affirmed the judgment, holding that the seizure was lawful under the plain view doctrine.

On appeal, the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania held that the seizure was constitutional under the plain view doctrine. It found that the police had a lawful vantage point, the incriminating nature of the gun was immediately apparent, and the police had a lawful right of access to the gun. The court emphasized that the unexpected development of probable cause during a lawful traffic stop justified the seizure without a warrant. Accordingly, the court affirmed the Superior Court’s order denying suppression of the firearm.
