---
source: "28 BF 9JUL2021.docx"
tags:
  - Probable-Cause
  - Automobile-Exception
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - Terry-Stop
  - Traffic-Stop
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - Extended-Stop
  - Community-Caretaking
  - Warrantless-Entry-into-Dwelling
  - Qualified-Immunity
  - Deliberate-Indifference
  - Failure-to-Train
  - Search
  - Closely-Regulated-Business-Exception
  - Baker-Act
  - Unlawful-Seizure
  - Municipal-Liability
  - pervasive-practice
  - Miranda
  - Custody
  - Interrogation
  - Traffic-Stop
  - Passenger
  - Backpack-Search
  - Inevitable-Discovery
---

28 BF 9JUL2021

United States v. Gondres-Medrano   4thCIR   8JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Probable Cause, Automobile Exception

The Fourth Circuit affirmed defendant's conviction and sentence for possession with intent to distribute a mixture containing fentanyl and heroin. The court concluded that police had probable cause to search the shoebox for drugs under the automobile exception where the officers used a reliable informant who had provided accurate information in the past and where officers corroborated significant parts of the informant's information. The court also concluded that the district court did not abuse its discretion by admitting a video that showed defendant opening a heroin package under Federal Rule of Evidence 403 where it was highly probative to the government's case and to undermining defendant's defense. Finally, the court concluded that there was no error in the district court's application of a two-level sentencing enhancement for obstruction of justice under USSG 3C1.1 for perjury during sentencing.

To read or download the full decision CLICK HERE

Walker v. Donahoe   4thCIR   7JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Reasonable Suspicion, Terry Stop

A week after a gunman opened fire inside a Parkland, Florida school with an AR-15-style assault rifle, a 911 call reported a man with an assault rifle walking along Route 33 in Putnam County. Corporal Donahoe and Deputy Pauley were dispatched, knowing that a k-12 school was less than a mile ahead of the armed man (Walker), who was wearing military-style clothing. Seeing Walker, the officers believed that he could be under the age of 18. It is generally legal in West Virginia for persons over the age of 18 to openly carry firearms. Walker challenged the officers’ authority to stop and detain him and initially declined to produce identification, He relented but refused to provide information about his gun and his reason for carrying it. Donahoe did not restrain Walker, pat him down, or otherwise touch him. Donahoe called for a criminal history check, telling Walker “I have the absolute legal right to see whether you’re legal to carry that gun,” indicating that Walker could not leave. Learning that Walker was 24 and only had a misdemeanor conviction, Donahoe returned Walker’s identification papers and told him that he was free to go. The encounter lasted less than nine minutes. The Fourth Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of Donahoe in Walker’s suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983. There was reasonable suspicion supporting Donahoe’s investigatory detention of Walker. Lawful conduct can contribute to reasonable suspicion; the circumstances of Walker’s firearm possession were unusual and alarming enough to engender reasonable suspicion.

United States v. Callison   8thCIR   2JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Traffic Stop, Reasonable Suspicion, Extended Stop

The Eighth Circuit reversed the district court's grant of defendant's motion to suppress drug-related evidence that police uncovered during a traffic stop. The court agreed with the government that the officer who pulled over defendant and others in the vehicle did not extend the traffic stop until he asked the driver of the vehicle if there was anything illegal in the car roughly six minutes into the encounter. In this case, when the officer asked his initial series of travel-related questions between five and six minutes into the encounter, he was still handling the matter for which the stop was made -- issuing a ticket for the unlit license plate violation. Therefore, the court concluded that the district court erred in holding that the officer needed reasonable suspicion of another crime to extend the stop when he began asking travel-related questions five minutes into the encounter. The court also agreed with the government that by the time the officer asked if there was anything illegal in the car, he had the reasonable suspicion required to extend the stop.

Clemons v. Couch   6thCIR   7JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Community Caretaking, Warrantless Entry into Dwelling, Qualified Immunity, Deliberate Indifference, Failure to Train

Christina and Dustin lived with Dustin’s parents, Richard and Evalee. Christina filed for divorce. After a physical altercation with her in-laws, Christina left. Christina requested a law-enforcement escort to retrieve her belongings, stating that she was afraid to go alone. Trooper Couch accompanied Christina and followed Christina and her mother inside. Richard and Evalee were disturbed that law enforcement had entered their home. Dustin became hostile and shouted that he did not want Christina, Christina’s mother, or the trooper in his home. Richard called his son-in-law Napier, a Perry County sheriff’s deputy, who soon arrived. As Christina and Couch exited the house, Richard insulted Couch. A fight ensued. Napier disrupted the brawl; Couch deployed his taser to subdue Richard and Dustin. Richard, Dustin, and Evalee were arrested but a grand jury declined to issue indictments. Richard sued under 42 U.S.C. 1983 for wrongful entry, excessive force, wrongful arrest, deliberate indifference, and failure to train. The district court dismissed the claims against the Commonwealth, the state police, and Couch in his official capacity and granted Couch qualified immunity on the unlawful-entry claim, citing the “community caretaker” exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement, and noting that Couch had Christina’s consent to enter the home. The Sixth Circuit reversed and remanded. A reasonable jury could conclude that Couch’s conduct was in violation of Richard’s clearly established Fourth Amendment right to be free from the state’s warrantless entry into his home.

Killgore v. City of South El Monte   9thCIR   8JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Search, Closely Regulated Business Exception

The Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's dismissal based on failure to state a claim of a 42 U.S.C. 1983 action brought by plaintiff, alleging that the City violated his Fourth Amendment rights when authorities, without a warrant, searched his massage business. The panel concluded that the Fourth Amendment permitted the warrantless searches of plaintiff's massage business where the California massage industry is a closely regulated industry and the Fourth Amendment's warrantless search exception for administrative searches of businesses applied. The panel applied the factors in New York v. Burger, 482 U.S. 691 (1987), and held that the warrantless inspections were reasonable under the Fourth Amendment because there is no question that curtailing prostitution and human trafficking is a substantial government interest; the warrant exception is necessary to further the regulatory scheme considering the potential ease of concealing violations; and the City ordinance governing massage establishments and the conditional use permit sufficiently restrained the City in both the time and purpose of each inspection. Therefore, the district court properly dismissed plaintiff's Fourth Amendment claims.

Khoury v. Miami-Dade County School Board   11thCIR   7JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Baker Act, Unlawful Seizure, Municipal Liability, pervasive practice

Khoury lives near the school’s baseball field and complained about parking, noise, lights, and the influx of people. Khoury took photos of cars that she believed were illegally parked. Khoury and a parent had a verbal confrontation. Williams, a Miami-Dade Public School police officer, told Khoury the cars were not illegally parked and told the parents there was nothing he could do about Khoury filming. Other residents told Williams that Khoury took photos of their children and that they were “afraid of her.” Khoury claims Williams “charged” her because she was recording him and twisted her arm behind her back. Williams and the parent claim that Khoury “pushed” Williams, then threw herself on the ground,” yelling “false arrest.” After handcuffing Khoury, Williams detained her under the Baker Act for mental health observation and took her to a hospital for treatment of her dislocated elbow. She was transferred to Miami Behavioral Health Center, which found no evidence of "psychosis.” Khoury was released two days later and filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983, alleging that the School Board had an unwritten policy of improperly detaining people under the Baker Act to reduce crime statistics. The Eleventh Circuit affirmed summary judgment in favor of the Board, noting the lack of evidence establishing a pervasive practice. The court reversed as to Williams, noting the many disputed facts. Williams concluded Khoury was “not mentally well” simply because she didn’t believe that the cars were parked legally; Khoury was not violating the law or harming anyone by filming, and other eyewitnesses testified that Khoury was not a threat—her response was simply irrational. That alone does not form a basis under which a reasonable officer would conclude that Khoury was a danger to herself or others.

In re Matthew W.   CACOA   8JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Miranda, Custody, Interrogation

A juvenile wardship petition (Welfare and Institutions Code section 602(a)) alleged that Matthew had committed assault with a deadly weapon and assault by means likely to produce great bodily injury; that Matthew had personally inflicted great bodily injury on the victim and had caused the victim to suffer great bodily injury resulting in paralysis and had personally used a deadly weapon, a knife. The juvenile court found true all of the allegations except for the paralysis enhancement; dismissed count two and the accompanying enhancement, at the request of the prosecutor; declared Matthew a ward of the court; and placed Matthew on probation with conditions. The California Courts of Appeal reversed, finding that Matthew’s pre-arrest statements to police were made during a custodial interrogation without the required Miranda warnings and that the admission of those statements was prejudicial. While Matthew was told at the start of the interrogation that he was not under arrest, and the police officers who were present did not handcuff him or unholster their weapons, the interview was initiated by police, who had just heard from another that Matthew had stabbed the victim. The entire interrogation was an attempt to get Matthew to admit that he stabbed the victim and to provide additional incriminating information.

North Dakota v. Lelm   NDSC   8JUL2021

> **Areas of Law:** Traffic Stop, Passenger, Backpack Search, Inevitable Discovery

The State appealed an order suppressing evidence obtained from a warrantless search of Nicholas Lelm’s backpack. In 2019, a City of Mandan Police Officer initiated a traffic stop of a vehicle with two occupants, a driver and a passenger. The driver was arrested on outstanding warrants and for driving under suspension. The driver provided his consent to search the vehicle. Lelm, the passenger, was seated in the front passenger seat with a backpack on his lap. The officer who initiated the stop called for the assistance of a drug-detection canine. After the canine arrived, Lelm was asked to exit the vehicle. Lelm exited and took his backpack with him. Lelm placed his backpack on the ground some distance from the vehicle. The officers then detained Lelm, conducted a pat-down search, placed him in handcuffs, and secured him in the back of a patrol vehicle. While Lelm was detained and secured in the patrol vehicle, his backpack remained on the ground. The canine positively alerted on the front passenger door prompting a search of the vehicle. While on the scene, the canine paid no attention to the backpack. Upon completing the search of the vehicle, the officers searched the backpack and discovered drug paraphernalia and marijuana. After he had been placed under arrest, Lelm complained of chest pains and requested medical assistance. An ambulance was called to the scene to transport Lelm to the hospital. At Lelm’s suppression hearing, an officer testified that ambulance personnel generally require a search of personal property before an individual is transported to the hospital. The officer testified the backpack would have been searched if the backpack was in the ambulance and if Lelm would have claimed the backpack as his property. Challenging the suppression order, the State argued the warrantless search was reasonable under either the automobile exception or search incident to arrest exception to the warrant requirement. Alternatively, the State argued that even if the warrantless search was unreasonable, the evidence was admissible under the inevitable discovery doctrine. Because neither the automobile exception nor the search incident to arrest exception applied to the warrantless search, and the State did not meet its burden of establishing the evidence would have been inevitably discovered, the North Dakota Supreme Court affirmed.
