---
source: "1 BF 7JAN2022.docx"
tags:
  - seizure-of-a-person
  - consent-to-search
  - Seizure-of-a-Person
  - Terry-Stop
  - Reasonable-Suspicion
  - independent-source-doctrine
  - use-of-force
  - qualified-immunity
  - search-of-a-bag
  - probable-cause
  - reasonable-suspicion
  - traffic-stop
  - traffic-stop
  - mission-related-activity
  - extended-stop
  - Rodriguez-Rule
---

**1 BF 7JAN2022**

**United States v. Jones**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** seizure of a person, consent to search

Allen County Officers received an arrest warrant for a woman named Whitney Gosnell. An anonymous tip indicated that Gosnell was staying at a Fort Wayne motel. The motel manager stated that Gosnell was staying in a room with Jones. The officers discovered that Jones had arrests dating back to the 1990s and was listed as a “known resister,” “convicted felon,” and “substance abuser.” The officers went to room and knocked and called out Jones’s street name “Crunch” and said: “It’s police. We’re not here for you.” Jones responded, “She’s not here.” The officers asked Jones to open the door. He requested some time, which the officers acknowledged. Less than a minute later, Jones opened the door. The officers estimated that 30-60 seconds elapsed between the first knock and when Jones opened the door. Upon opening the door, in conversational tones, the officers reiterated that they were not there for Jones, showed him the warrant, and explained that they would like to “verify” Gosnell was not there. Jones said, “fine,” and moved away from the door. One officer lifted a bed to look under it. The other officer lifted the second bed and discovered a firearm. Jones sought to suppress the firearm arguing he was seized upon opening the door (tainting his consent to search) and that the officers exceeded the scope of the consent by looking in a very small space (8-10 inches) under the beds.  Jones pled guilty to possessing a firearm as a convicted felon, 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1) after the denial of his motion to suppress. The Seventh Circuit affirmed the denial of the motion. The court held Jones was not seized prior to the search. Under the totality of the circumstances, a reasonable person in Jones’s position would have felt free to decline the officers’ request to open the door. Furthermore, Jones voluntarily consented to a search of his motel room and that it was reasonable for the officers to believe the scope of consent extended to the space under the beds.

**United States v. ****Shaffers**
US Court of Appeals for the Seventh Circuit
Opinion Date: January 5, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** Seizure of a Person, Terry Stop, Reasonable Suspicion

Around midnight, four people were in Shaffers' car, with Shaffers in the driver’s seat, smoking and listening to music while parked. Chicago Police Officers Streeper and Bruno heard loud music coming from the car and smelled marijuana. They blocked Shaffers' car with their car, then approached, identified themselves, and instructed the occupants to put their hands up. Streeper testified that Shaffers initially failed to comply and made “furtive movements with his hands below the [driver’s] seat.” Shaffers fled. Streeper recovered a gun from the floorboard between the driver’s seat and the console. Months later, Shaffers was arrested while appearing in state court for a traffic infraction. Shaffers was charged as a felon in possession of a firearm, 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1). Denying Shaffers’ motion to suppress, the court concluded that the officers’ approach was a seizure because Shaffers could not move his car and a reasonable person would not have felt free to leave but that the seizure was permissible under "Terry" because the officers had reasonable suspicion. The Seventh Circuit upheld his convictions, rejecting arguments that the gun should have been suppressed.

**United States v. Brooks**
US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** independent source doctrine

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's order denying defendant's motion to suppress, concluding that the evidence seized under the warrant should not be excluded. The court concluded that the record supports the district court's implicit finding that the disputed information was independent of any unlawful seizure. The court also concluded that the district court did not err in finding that investigators independently discovered the baggage incident from November 2016. In this case, it is reasonable to infer that once defendant's suspicious activities with currency were tied to the airport, investigators would review airport records on that basis alone to determine whether defendant had engaged in other suspicious activity at the airport. Even if the detention of defendant at the airport was unlawful, his voluntary and warned statements to investigators at the police station were sufficiently disconnected from the unlawful seizure to make them admissible. Therefore, it was proper for the district court to consider defendant's statements from that interview about structuring cash withdrawals in evaluating whether the search warrant affidavit established probable cause to search his home. Finally, after redacting from the affidavit evidence that resulted from the airport detention, the court concluded that the remaining information established probable cause to search.

**Hyde v. City of Wilcox**
US Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** use of force, qualified immunity

Hyde, a 26-year-old with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and ADHD, took six prescription medications. After his arrest on suspicion of DUI, Hyde submitted to a blood draw. He tested negative for alcohol but positive for amphetamines, consistent with his prescriptions. After several hours without his medications, Hyde charged the door, fell, and injured his head. Hyde emerged from his cell calmly, then sprinted away. He reached a dead end, Officers deployed their Tasers multiple times, then tackled Hyde. After Hyde was in a restraint chair, Pralgo again used his Taser. Callahan-English used her arms to force Hyde’s head into a restraint hold. Minutes later Hyde rolled his head back, gasping for air, as officers passed by. He stopped breathing. Officers tried to revive him. Days later, Hyde died. Hyde’s causes of death included blunt force injuries, kidney damage caused by muscle breakdown, enlarged heart, and coronary artery atherosclerosis. The Ninth Circuit affirmed in part the denial of a motion to dismiss a 42 U.S.C. 1983 suit. Officers Pralgo and Callahan-English used excessive force and violated clearly established law when they used a Taser and put Hyde in a head restraint after Hyde, handcuffed and shackled, posed no threat. Other officers reasonably used force when Hyde resisted. The complaint did not adequately allege that the officers knew of Hyde’s mental health condition or that he was in distress after the altercation; qualified immunity barred the claim that they violated Hyde’s right to adequate medical care. With respect to the failure-to-train and municipal liability claims, the court stated that an inadequate training policy itself cannot be inferred from a single incident.

**United States v. ****Bullcoming**
US Court of Appeals for the Tenth Circuit
Opinion Date: January 6, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** search of a bag, probable cause

Linda Zotigh was murdered, and her trailer, in which her boyfriend Tommy Bullcoming also periodically resided, was set on fire. The day after law enforcement found Zotigh’s body, they arrested Bullcoming pursuant to a warrant for failure to appear in court on an earlier marijuana possession charge. At the time of his arrest, Bullcoming had a black duffel bag in his possession, and he asked law enforcement to bring the bag with them during his transport to the courthouse. Law enforcement searched the bag on three separate occasions and used information from these searches in the affidavit filed in support of the search warrant. Following issuance of a search warrant, law enforcement found a pair of sandals spotted with blood inside the bag. Authorities later matched the blood to Zotigh. Prior to his trial, Bullcoming moved both for an order to access Zotigh’s trailer and to suppress evidence from the duffel bag. The district court denied both motions. A jury ultimately convicted Bullcoming of felony murder, kidnapping, carjacking, and arson. On appeal, Bullcoming challenged the denial of both of his motions. At the time Bullcoming filed his motion for access to the trailer, a third party, not the Government, possessed it. The district court ultimately held it did not have authority “to order entry and inspection of property that is not within the government’s possession, custody, or control.” The Tenth Circuit concurred the district court lacked authority to grant Bullcoming access to the trailer. With regard to the search of the bag, Bullcoming argued the searches were illegal. The Tenth Circuit concluded probable cause supported the search warrant for Bullcoming's bag. The district court's denials of Bullcoming's motions were affirmed.

**State v. Gardner**
Montana Supreme Court
Opinion Date: January 4, 2022

> **Areas of Law:** reasonable suspicion, traffic stop

The Supreme Court reversed the order of the district court affirming the denial of Defendant's motion to suppress evidence, holding that law enforcement officers lacked particularized suspicion to justify their investigatory stop of Defendant. Defendant was stopped by law enforcement officers based solely on his "flicking" his high beams on and off once. Defendant entered a conditional guilty plea to aggravated driving under the influence, third offense, reserving the right to appeal the justice court's denial of his motion to suppress. The district court affirmed. The Supreme Court reversed, holding that the totality of the circumstances did not give rise to particularized suspicion, and therefore, the seizure violated Defendant's constitutional right to be free from unreasonable searches and seizures.

**State v. Sargent**
Minnesota Supreme Court
Opinion Date: December 29, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** traffic stop, mission-related activity, extended stop, Rodriguez Rule

The Supreme Court reversed Defendant's conviction of illegal possession of ammunition, holding that the district court erred by denying Defendant's motion to suppress. During a traffic stop, law enforcement officers questioned Defendant, who was a passenger in the stopped vehicle, regarding the conditions of his pretrial release. After Defendant was arrested for violating a condition of his pretrial release, a pat-down search revealed ammunition in Defendant's pocket. Defendant filed a motion to suppress, arguing that the officer’s questions about the conditions of his pretrial release improperly expanded the scope of the traffic stop. The district court denied the motion, and the court of appeals affirmed. The Supreme Court reversed, holding (1) violation of a condition of pretrial release does not constitute criminal activity allowing a law enforcement officer to expand the scope of a traffic stop; and (2) the officer's questioning of Defendant about the conditions of his pretrial release exceeded the permissible scope of a traffic stop.
