---
source: "50 BF 10DEC2021.docx"
tags:  []
---

50 BF 10DEC2021

United States v. Guerrero   1st CIR   6DEC2021

Summary: First Circuit eliminates precedent requirement for showing of subjective fear before conducting Terry Frisk. Supreme Court cases (Buie) make it clear that is it purely objective test. 

In United States v. Lott, 870 F.2d 778 (1st Cir. 1989), the First Circuit developed a two-prong test with both an objective component and a subjective component. Under this precedent, officers not only had to show a reasonable suspicion that the person to be frisked was presently armed and dangerous, but additionally they had to establish that the were actually concerned for their safety. Based on this precedent, the district judge in this case granted Defendant's motion to suppress after finding that while officers had an objectively reasonable basis to search the car, they had no subjective concerns for their safety. The First Circuit reversed the judgment of the district court granting Defendant's motion to suppress evidence seized during a protective search of a car, holding that the actual-fear analysis set forth, is no longer controlling. The First Circuit reversed the judge's evidence suppression and remanded the case for further proceedings, holding that Lott is no longer controlling in light of subsequent Supreme Court decisions. 

Gupta v. Melloh   7th CIR   6DEC2021

Summary: QI denied – issue of material fact from surveillance video.

Responding to a call from a hotel about a person trying to enter a hotel at which he was not a guest, police encountered Gupta who appeared to be drunk and belligerent. Surveillance video was recovered that showed Gupta stumbling around and knocking over a brochure rack. A police officer, attempting to move Gupta outside, tugged on his handcuffed arm which caused Gupta to fall on his head and fracture a vertebra in his neck. The officer then picked Gupta up by the arms and dragged him to the sidewalk. The officer asserts that he used a reasonable amount of force because Gupta was resisting arrest. Gupta asserts that he was not resisting the arrest, and was intoxicated, unsteady on his feet, and handcuffed with his hands behind his back. The video does not show Gupta stiffening or jerking himself away from the officer. Gupta brought a civil suit for excessive force under 42 U.S.C. 1983. The officer sought qualified immunity, which the District Court granted. The Seventh Circuit reversed , holding the video tape created material disputes of fact that must be resolved by a jury, making resolution of this case on summary judgment inappropriate.

United States v. Saddler   8th CIR   3DEC2021

Summary: Probable Cause existed to support warrant, LEOs reliance on warrant was reasonable, and plain view seizures during execution were reasonable.

Officers responded to a shooting in an apartment building's parking lot. There were three victims were transported to the hospital. On the scene, officers observed a security camera in the window of Apartment 1 that pointed toward the parking lot. After interviewing two witnesses, Detective Dunn viewed video footage from a business across the street, which corroborated their account. He learned that Haney, an occupant of Apartment 1, was involved in a dispute with the sister of two of the shooting victims. Detective Dunn obtained a warrant to search Apartment 1 which was later executed by other officers.  While executing the search warrant, an officer moved clothes in the bedroom closet and saw a sawed-off shotgun. He also seized a baggie of white powder, a laptop, and cell phones from the bedroom. Other officers seized cameras, a computer monitor, a Kindle, shotgun shells, pieces of a scale with traces of drug residue, photographs, and documents bearing the names of Haney and Saddler. At trial, Saddler sought to suppress all evidence seized during the search claiming the items were seized in violation of her Fourth Amendment rights. She also sought to suppress incriminating statement she later made concerning the shotgun. The Eighth Circuit affirmed her subsequent conviction as a felon in possession of a firearm, 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1). The court held that the affidavit described facts that connected Haney to the shooting and created a fair probability that evidence that would aid in a particular apprehension or conviction would be found and therefore established probable cause. The officer's reliance on the issuance of the warrant was objectively reasonable. In addition, the seizure of the shotgun satisfied the “plain view” exception.

North Dakota v. Vannett   NDSCt   9DEC2021

Summary: Consensual Encounter, Reasonable Suspicion for Detention

Len Vannett appealed an amended criminal judgment entered after his conditional guilty plea for actual physical control of a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol. He argued the arresting officer lacked reasonable and articulable suspicion for the stop and the approved methods were not followed in administering the intoxilyzer breath machine. Finding no reversible error, the North Dakota Supreme Court affirmed Vannett's conviction. The court held that when the officer first approached Vannett it was a consensual encounter. When the officer reached in and turned off the car, Vannett was detained, but at that point the officer had RS that Vannett was driving drunk.

Oregon v. Reyes-Herrera   ORSCt   9DEC2021

Summary: Walking up to defendant and telling them they are subject of drug activity constitutes a seizure which requires reasonable suspicion.

On a weekday afternoon in September 2018, a police officer drove his patrol car by an alleyway and saw two men walking away from each other. One man was counting money, and, when he saw the officer, the man “put the money in his pocket and kind of put his head down [and] looked a little nervous.” The other man, Defendant Saul Reyes-Herrera, was walking in the other direction. The officer believed that the two men had “just done some sort of a hand-to-hand transaction,” which he thought was “possibly a drug deal.” The officer then drove into the alleyway, ahead of where defendant was walking, and parked the patrol car. The officer did not activate his overhead lights or his siren. Instead, he got out of his car, “took a couple steps towards [defendant], waved and said hi.” In his uniform, the officer approached defendant, stating defendant was free to leave, but asked whether defendant had bought drugs from the man observed counting his money. Defendant responded "no," but detecting a slight Spanish accent, the officer asked again, in Spanish, "no drogas?" Defendant responded "no" again, but the officer then asked in English whether he could search defendant. Defendant responded in Spanish, “sí.” Then, while pointing to defendant’s pockets, the officer asked in Spanish, “puedo mirar,” which he understood to mean, roughly, “can I look.” Defendant again responded, “sí,” and “put his hands up on his head.” At that point, the officer began “controlling” defendant’s hands: placing defendant’s hands behind his back to immobilize him, and, while doing so, searched defendant’s pockets. The officer reached into the coin pocket of defendant’s right front pants pocket and found “two baggies that contained a clear crystal substance” that he believed to be methamphetamine. Defendant was arrested, and the state charged him with one count of unlawful possession of methamphetamine. Defendant moved to suppress the evidence of the drugs discovered in his pocket, arguing that he had been stopped without reasonable suspicion in violation of Article I, section 9, and that the discovery of the drugs was the product of that unlawful seizure. The trial court denied the motion to suppress, concluding that the officer had not stopped defendant and that defendant had consented to the search of his pocket. Defendant waived his right to a jury trial, and the court convicted defendant of the charged offense. The Oregon Supreme Court found the officer lacked a reasonable suspicion of criminal activity, and reversed Defendant's conviction.

*In   this   **case,   **the   uncontested   facts   show   that   **Delepine**,  who  was  in  uniform,  parked  his  car  in  an  alley,  got  out  to  investigate  what  he  believed  could  be  a  possible  “drug  deal,”  and  approached  defendant,  who  also  was  on foot.  **Delepine**  told**  defendant  that  he  had  observed  defendant walk away from a conversation with another man who was  counting  money  and  asked  defendant  whether  defendant  had  purchased  drugs  from  the  man  and  whether  he  was in possession of drugs.*
