---
source: "42 BF 15OCT2021.docx"
tags:
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
  - Civil-Rights
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
---

BF 15OCT2021

United States v. Prigmore

Court: US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit

Docket: 20-3989

Opinion Date: October 12, 2021

Judge: Larsen

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

A Xenia Police dispatcher contacted officer Reed about a double-parked vehicle with the person in the backseat allegedly “shooting up.” Reed observed a vehicle straddling the line between a standard parking spot and a handicap-only space; it was not displaying a handicap placard or license plate and was illegally parked. Prigmore opened the rear passenger door of the vehicle. Reed saw what appeared to be a handgun in the pocket of the door; he activated his body camera, unholstered his firearm, and secured the gun. With Prigmore out of the vehicle, Reed observed another firearm (a BB gun) on the seat where Prigmore had been sitting. Days later, federal agents arrested Prigmore for drug trafficking. The agents did not interview or Mirandize Prigmore immediately because he appeared to be “under the influence.” When he arrived at booking, Prigmore appeared coherent and stated—unprompted—“that gun was mine.” A warranted search of Prigmore’s residence uncovered a box of ammunition. Charged with possessing a firearm and ammunition as a felon, 18 U.S.C. 922(g)(1), Prigmore had a “volatile relationship” with his attorneys, resulting in two competency hearings. The Sixth Circuit affirmed his conviction and 120-month sentence, rejecting arguments that the district court erred in finding him competent to stand trial, should have granted his motions to suppress, and that his sentence was substantively unreasonable.

United States v. Foster
Court: US Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit
Opinion Date: October 12, 2021

Summary: Requesting ID from passenger did not impermissibly extend stop

The Eighth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress after defendant pleaded guilty to being a felon in possession of a firearm. In this case, a police officer stopped the vehicle defendant was driving for having an unsafe windshield and, during the scope of the traffic stop, the officer asked defendant to get out of the vehicle, conducted a pat down search, and discovered a handgun. The court concluded that the district court did not abuse its discretion by deciding, in the absence of disputed facts, to rule on the motion to suppress without conducting an evidentiary hearing. The court also concluded that a reasonable officer could have believed on initial observation that the cracked windshield constituted a safety defect and the officer's mistake of fact was an objectively reasonable one. Therefore, defendant was not unreasonably seized when the officer conducted the traffic stop. Furthermore, the officer did not unlawfully expand the scope or extend the stop when he asked for identification from the occupants of the vehicle.

State v. Pompei

Court: Connecticut Supreme Court

Docket: SC20530

Opinion Date: October 19, 2021

Judge: Ecker

> **Areas of Law:** Civil Rights, Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

The Supreme Court affirmed Defendant's conviction of two counts of interfering with an officer, in violation of Conn. Gen. Stat. 53a-167a(a), holding that there was no error in the proceedings below. At issue on appeal was whether the trial court erred in denying Defendant's pretrial motion to suppress on the grounds that he was seized in violation of the Fourth Amendment when a marked police cruiser blocked the egress of his vehicle, which was parked with its engine running and Defendant asleep in the driver's seat. The Supreme Court affirmed, holding that no violation of the Fourth Amendment occurred because the responding officer was checking on Defendant's well-being pursuant to the officer's community caretaking function and was not engaged in an investigatory stop involving criminal activity.
