---
source: "19MAR2021 BF.docx"
tags:  []
---

United States v. Austin   1stCIR   12MAR2021
The First Circuit denied Defendant's appeal of his conviction for unlawful possession of a firearm by a prohibited person, holding that the district court did not commit plain error by denying his motion to suppress. The First Circuit affirmed, holding the search warrant issued for Defendant's residence was supported by probable cause based on first hand knowledge by a victim of the criminal act.
NOTE: Good case for what is required for someone’s testimony to establish probable cause. Distinguishes between the word of victim and a confidential informant.
 

United States v. Nelson   5thCIR   12MAR2021
The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's denial of defendant's motion to suppress, concluding that the totality of the circumstances supports a finding that the Border Patrol agent had reasonable suspicion to justify stopping defendant's vehicle. In this case, the agent noticed irregularities with the vehicle where the seal on the trailer was likely incompatible with a scan that seemingly showed a small amount of personal equipment inside, and Vehicle and Cargo Inspection System images of the trailer were consistent with images of bundles of narcotics. The court also concluded that defendant was not in custody for Miranda purposes during the stop and therefore he was not entitled to Miranda warnings.
 

United States v. Norbert   5thCIR   16MAR2021
The Fifth Circuit affirmed the district court's grant of defendant's motion to suppress evidence that was needed to convict the defendant of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon. The district court determined that police officers did not have reasonable suspicion to conduct the investigatory stop of defendant, and thus the gun and statements to police were suppressed as fruits of the poisonous tree. The Fifth Circuit agreed with the District Court and concluded that the district court did not err in finding that the officers did not have reasonable suspicion to conduct an investigatory stop. In this case, the district court found that the informant's tip lacked credibility and reliability because the caller did not provide her name or phone number and had no history of reliable reports of criminal activity, and the police officers did not attempt to contact the management of the apartments to determine who made the phone call.
 

State v Clark ME SC 16MAR2021
The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed Defendant's judgment of conviction for intentional or knowing murder, holding that the district court did not err or abuse its discretion. On appeal, Defendant argued that the trial court erred in refusing to give a jury instruction on the affirmative defense of adequate provocation, erroneously denied his motion to suppress multiple confessions, and abuse its discretion in denying his motion to recuse the presiding justice. The Supreme Judicial Court affirmed, holding that the trial court (1) correctly determined that the jury instruction for adequate provocation was not generated by the evidence; (2) did not err in determining that the statements Defendant sought to suppress were voluntary; and (3) did not abuse its discretion by denying Defendant's motion to recuse.
