---
source: "BF 5NOV2021.docx"
tags:
  - First-Amendment
  - Fourth-Amendment
  - Retaliation
  - Warrant-Sufficiency-and-Omissions
  - Constitutional-Law
  - Criminal-Law
---

BF 5NOV2021

Villarreal v. City of Laredo
US Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit
Opinion Date: November 1, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** First Amendment, Fourth Amendment, Retaliation

“If the First Amendment means anything, it surely means that a citizen journalist has the right to ask a public official a question, without fear of being imprisoned. Yet that is exactly what happened here: Priscilla Villarreal was put in jail for asking a police officer a question.”

Villareal is a non-traditional journalist who regularly reports on local crime, missing persons, community events, and other news to her 120,000 followers on her Facebook page. In April 2017, Villarreal published a story about a man who committed suicide. The story identified the man by name and revealed that he was an agent with the U.S. Border Patrol. Villarreal first uncovered this information from talking to a janitor who worked near the scene of the suicide. She then contacted LPD Officer Barbara Goodman, who confirmed the man’s identity. The following month, Villarreal published the last name of a family involved in a fatal car accident in Laredo. She first learned the family’s identity from a relative of the family who saw a video that Villarreal had posted. Again, Villarreal contacted Officer Goodman, and again, the officer verified this information. 

Six months later, two arrest warrants were issued for Villarreal for violating Texas Penal Code § 39.06(c), which prohibits obtaining non-public information from a public servant for personal benefit. Villareal filed suit under 42 U.S.C. 1983 against various Laredo police officers, Webb County prosecutors, Webb County, and the City of Laredo, alleging a pattern of harassment and retaliation by various local officials, culminating in her arrest, in violation of her First, Fourth, and Fourteenth Amendment rights. The district court dismissed all of her claims. 

**T****he Fifth Circuit ****reversed, and ****joined its sister circuits in holding that the doctrine of qualified immunity does not permit government officials to invoke patently unconstitutional statutes like section 39.06(c) to avoid liability for their actions.** **T****he court reversed the district court's**** grant of qualified immunity**** concluding that it should be patently obvious to any reasonable police officer that locking up a journalist for asking questions of public officials violates the First Amendment.** Just as the First Amendment violation alleged in the complaint was obvious for purposes of qualified immunity, the court concluded that so too was the Fourth Amendment violation alleged here. Therefore, Fifth Circuit held that the district court erred in dismissing the Fourth Amendment claim. The court affirmed the district court's dismissal of the municipal liability claim against the City.

 

YouTube Video: https://youtu.be/A8pnetkEkLU

United States v. Leonard
US Court of Appeals for the First Circuit
Opinion Date: November 3, 2021

> **Areas of Law:** Warrant Sufficiency and Omissions

The First Circuit affirmed the ruling of the district court rejecting Defendant's request for a Franks hearing before Defendant entered a conditional guilty plea to one count of possession of a firearm by a prohibited person, holding that the district court did not err in denying Defendant a Franks hearing. Defendant was charged with one count of possession of a firearm by a prohibited person and one count of possession with the intent to distribute cocaine. Prior to trial, Defendant filed a motion to suppress evidence seized pursuant to search warrants and sought a Franks hearing on the basis of two alleged material omissions from the warrant affidavit. The district court denied both Defendant's Franks motion and his motion to suppress. The First Circuit affirmed, holding that the district court did not err in ruling that Defendant had failed to make the threshold showing necessary to obtain a Franks hearing.

 

George v. Georgia
Court: Supreme Court of Georgia
Opinion Date: November 2, 2021

Topic: Plain view seizures when executing search warrant.
Tags:  

Harold George was convicted by jury of two counts of child molestation and related offenses. He appealed to the Georgia Court of Appeals, which affirmed his convictions in an unpublished opinion. In addressing one of George’s four enumerations of error, the Court of Appeals rejected his argument that the search of his home exceeded the scope of the relevant search warrant, agreeing with the trial court that “the police officers were not compelled to overlook relevant evidence simply because it was not specifically listed in the search warrant.” The search warrant allowed for the seizure of digital devices but the officers seized notes and papers as well.

The Georgia Supreme Court determined both the appellate court and the trial court did not use the correct legal standard for a constitutional Fourth Amendment challenge to the seizure of evidence beyond the scope of a search warrant. The Court therefore vacated the relevant part of the Court of Appeals’ judgment and remand this case for further proceedings.

 

Vermont v. Barry
Court: Vermont Supreme Court
Opinion Date: October 29, 2021

Tags:

In an interlocutory appeal, the State contested a trial court’s order granting defendant Shannon Barry’s motion to suppress statements she made to law enforcement officers before her arrest. In June 2019, the Barre City Police Department launched an investigation after Heather Larocque died from taking fentanyl-laced heroin. The investigation led the officers to believe defendant sold the fentanyl-laced heroin to Larocque. Officers found defendant enter a convenience store and asked to talk to her as she exited. At no point during the discussion, which lasted between ten and twenty minutes, did the officers tell defendant she was free to leave or to not answer their questions. Defendant never requested to leave but believed she would have been arrested if she had tried to do so. She did not feel threatened and did not feel the officers were being dishonest in their conversation with her. Throughout the conversation, defendant was not handcuffed, and the officers’ weapons remained holstered. At the conclusion of the conversation, the officers arrested defendant. At no time prior to her arrest was defendant informed of her Miranda rights. Defendant was charged with selling or dispensing a regulated drug with death resulting. The Vermont Supreme Court concluded that defendant was in custody and had not been advised of her Miranda rights outside the convenience store, therefore the Court affirmed the suppression order.

 

Vermont v. Calabrese

Court: Vermont Supreme Court

Citation: 2021 VT 76

Opinion Date: October 29, 2021

Judge: Beth Robinson

> **Areas of Law:** Constitutional Law, Criminal Law

Defendant Devan Calabrese appealed his convictions for aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, unlawful possession of a firearm, and violation of conditions of release, arguing that the trial court erred in denying his motion to suppress evidence of a bullet on the ground at the site of the alleged crimes, and permitting the State to introduce evidence that he made certain racially charged statements. After its review, the Vermont Supreme Court concluded the trial court applied the incorrect legal standard to the suppression question, and remanded for additional factfinding and a reassessment of the motion. With respect to the court’s admission of evidence that defendant made statements evincing racial animus, the Supreme Court concluded the trial court did not abuse its discretion in admitting the testimony. The Court thus reversed the trial court’s ruling denying defendant’s motion to suppress and remanded for further proceedings.

Applies Vermont law under Vermont Constitution Article 11 which exceeds protections afforded by Fourth Amendment.
